The Project Gutenberg EBook of Guide to Historic Plymouth, by A. S. Burbank

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Guide to Historic Plymouth
       Localities and Objects of Interest

Author: A. S. Burbank

Release Date: May 11, 2018 [EBook #57135]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                 GUIDE
                                  _TO
                          Historical Plymouth_


                   Localities and Objects of Interest

                             _ILLUSTRATED_

    [Illustration: Mayflower]

                            PLYMOUTH, MASS.
                     Copyrighted, and Published By
                             A. S. BURBANK

                   Copyright, 1920, by A. S. Burbank.
                     Printed by the Memorial Press.


                               Contents.
  Beach Point                                                          64
  Burial Hill                                                          49
  Church of the First Parish                                           48
  Church of the Pilgrimage                                             47
  Clark’s Island                                                       80
  Cole’s Hill                                                          39
  Compact                                                              82
  Court House                                                          25
  Gov. Bradford’s House in 1621                                        46
  Gurnet                                                               37
  Harbor                                                               64
  Industries                                                           77
  Landing of the Pilgrims                                              36
  Leyden Street                                                        41
  Manomet Bluffs                                                       60
  Members of the Mayflower Company                                     83
  Morton Park                                                          67
  National Monument                               Frontispiece and page 8
  North Street                                                         33
  Old Fort and First Meeting House, 1621                               59
  Old Houses                                                           70
  Pilgrim Antiquities                                               16-25
  Pilgrim Hall                                                         13
  Plymouth as a Summer Resort                                          79
  Plymouth High School                                                 73
  Plymouth in 1627                                                     45
  Plymouth Rock                                                        31
  Post Office                                                          44
  Prison                                                               30
  Public Library                                                       74
  Registry Building                                                    27
  The Town                                                             73
  Town Brook                                                           69
  Town Square                                                          46
  Voyage of the Mayflower Shallop                                      65
  Watch Tower                                                          61
  Watson’s Hill                                                        61

    [Illustration: NATIONAL MONUMENT TO THE FOREFATHERS.]




                           Historic Plymouth


  “The Pilgrim Fathers—where are they?
    The waves that brought them o’er
  Still roll in the bay, and throw their spray,
    As they break along the shore.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

The introduction of visitors to Plymouth as they come by rail, is at
Seaside, a station in the extreme north part of the town, at the
dividing line between Kingston and Plymouth. As the cars slow up
passengers see the beautiful panorama of Plymouth Harbor spread out
before their eyes. At the near left, across the bay appears Captain’s
Hill, so called from its being the home of Capt. Myles Standish, and on
its crest is a monument in honor of the Pilgrim warrior, surmounted by
his statue fourteen feet in height. Farther along is seen Rouse’s
Hummock, the American terminus of the French Atlantic cable. The next
prominent object is Clark’s Island, where the Pilgrims spent their first
Sabbath in Plymouth. Next to this is the headland of Saquish, and beyond
is the Garnet with its twin lighthouses. Opposite these the bold bluff
of Manomet thrusts itself out into the bay, while nearer inland the
long, thin ribbon of Plymouth Beach runs across the harbor, like an
artificial breakwater, to arrest the waves of the ocean.

    [Illustration: PLYMOUTH ROCK.]

    [Illustration: STANDISH HOUSE, BUILT BY SON OF MYLES STANDISH, 1666.
    CAPTAIN’S HILL, DUXBURY.]

Few scenes can surpass this in loveliness, if the visitor is fortunate
enough to arrive when the tide is in. Although by the configuration of
the land Plymouth Harbor seems to have been designed for a perfect haven
against every wind that blows, unfortunately it is dependent upon a full
sea for depth enough of water to float vessels of large draft to the
wharves. With the assistance of the State of Massachusetts a channel 150
feet wide with eighteen feet depth at mean low water, was opened in 1913
from Beach Point to the fine new stone pier of the Plymouth Cordage Co.,
and by it that great industrial plant now brings its fibre, for
manufacture, direct from Mexico to its mills in steamships of 3500 tons
measurement. In 1876 the United States Government dug a small channel
from Broad channel to the wharves, where none had existed. In 1914-15
the Government and State co-operated in improving the old “Mayflower
channel,” from deep water at Beach Point along the inside of the Beach
and up Broad channel to the town wharves, so that for the entire
distance there is a width of 200 feet and depth of 18 feet at mean low
water. This allows steamers and light draft vessels to land at any time
of tide, while at high water barges and heavy freight carriers drawing
25 feet or more can have easy access to the piers. These harbor
improvements accommodate any vessels that can pass through the Cape Cod
Canal which opens into the bay 16 miles below Plymouth and are of great
advantage to the Pilgrim port. Other important changes of the water
front and harbor may develop previous to the tercentenary celebration of
“the Landing,” to take place in 1920-21, plans and details for which are
in charge of a special State Commission.

Immediately upon leaving the station of the New York, New Haven &
Hartford Railroad, on arrival in Plymouth, and while traversing Old
Colony park to Court street, the main street of the town, the Samoset
House is in full view in the front. Looking towards the Samoset House on
the way through the park the first street on its right leading from
Court street is Cushman street; and the walk continued up Cushman street
and little northward along Allerton street, will shortly bring the
visitor to the National Monument to the Forefathers.




                The National Monument to the Forefathers


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

The corner stone of the National Monument was laid Aug. 2, 1859, and the
work entrusted to Hammatt Billings who drew the design for the Monument
in all its details. The main pedestal was put in position in 1876, and
in the following summer the statue of Faith was erected. The monument
was completed in October, 1888, and dedicated with appropriate
ceremonies August 1, 1889. It is built entirely of granite, the statues
all coming from the quarries of the Hallowell Granite Company of Maine.
(See frontispiece.)

The idea of building the monument to the memory of the Pilgrim Fathers
was early entertained in the town, and was formed into a definite object
by the incorporation of the Pilgrim Society in January, 1820; which
object was kept steadily in view and prosecuted to successful
conclusion.

The plan of the principal pedestal is octagonal, with four small and
four large faces; from the small faces project four buttresses or wing
pedestals. On the main pedestal stands the figure of Faith. One foot
rests upon Forefathers’ Rock; in her left hand she holds a Bible; with
the right uplifted she points to heaven. Looking downward, as to those
she is addressing, she seems to call to them to trust in a higher power.

    [Illustration: THE FIRST TREATY WITH THE INDIANS.
    Alto Relief on National Monument.]

    [Illustration: MORALITY.]

On each of the four buttresses or wing pedestals is a seated figure;
they are emblematic of the principles upon which the Pilgrims proposed
to found their commonwealth. The first is Morality, holding the
Decalogue in her left, and the scroll of Revelation in her right hand;
her look is upward toward the impersonation of the Spirit of Religion
above; in a niche, on one side of her throne, is a prophet, and in the
other, one of the Evangelists. The second of these figures is Law: on
one side Justice; on the other Mercy. The third is Education: on one
side Wisdom, ripe with years; on the other Youth, led by Experience. The
fourth figure is Freedom: on one side Peace rests under its Protection;
on the other Tyranny is overthrown by its powers. Below these seated
figures are marble alto-reliefs, representing scenes from the history of
the Pilgrims:—the Departure from Delft Haven; the first Treaty with the
Indians; Signing of the Social Compact; and the Landing at Plymouth. On
each of the four faces of the main pedestal is a large panel for
records. That in front contains the general inscription of the monument,
viz., “National Monument to the Forefathers. Erected by a grateful
people in remembrance of their labors, sacrifices and sufferings for the
cause of civil and religious liberty.” The right and left panel contain
the names of those who came over in the “Mayflower.” The rear panel is
plain, to have an inscription at some future day.

    [Illustration: LAW.]

The total height of the Monument is eighty-one feet, from the ground to
the top of the head of the statue of Faith. The following are some of
the dimensions of this great piece of work, said, on good authority, to
be the largest and finest piece of granite statuary in the world: the
height of the base is forty-five feet; height of statue, thirty-six
feet. The outstretched arm measures from shoulder to elbow, ten feet one
and one-half inches; from elbow to the tip of finger, nine feet nine
inches; total length of arm, nineteen feet ten and one-half inches. The
head measures around the forehead thirteen feet seven inches. The points
of the star, in the wreath around the head are just one foot across. The
arm, just below the short sleeve, measures six feet ten inches around;
below the elbow, six feet two inches. The wrist is four feet around. The
length of the finger pointing upwards is two feet one inch, and is one
foot eight and one-half inches around. The thumb measures one foot eight
and one-half inches around. The circumference of the neck is nine feet
two inches and the nose is one foot four inches long. From centre to
centre of the eyes is one foot six inches. The figure is two hundred and
sixteen times life size and its weight one hundred and eighty tons. A
bolt of lightning ran down the arm and figure Aug. 23, 1912, splitting
and displacing two blocks of the central section. They were restored to
position, without taking down the monument, by Mr. George W. Bradford, a
Plymouth contractor, a feat which reflected much credit upon his
engineering skill.

The statue of Faith was the gift of the late Oliver Ames, a native of
Plymouth, and its cost was $31,300. The total cost of the Monument was
$150,000, contributed by more than 11,000 people of the United States
and other countries.




                              Pilgrim Hall


    [Illustration: PILGRIM HALL, BUILT IN 1824.]

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Returning to Court street (the main street) from the Monument grounds,
and passing the head of Old Colony park, we soon see on our left a
building with a Doric portico, standing a little way from the street.
This is Pilgrim Hall, erected in 1824 by the Pilgrim Society as a
monumental hall to the memory of the Pilgrims. In 1880, without taking
down the walls, it was re-roofed and refloored with steel beams and
terra cotta blocks at a cost of over $15,000 by Joseph Henry Stickney,
Esq., a wealthy Baltimore merchant of Boston nativity, who on a casual
visit to Plymouth became so impressed of preserving with the greatest
care the interesting relics of the Pilgrims there deposited, that he
most liberally made this large expenditure to secure these precious
memorials from loss by fire. At the same time he provided for better
classification and exhibition of the articles, those immediately
connected with the Pilgrims being deposited, mostly in glass cases, in
the main hall, while an interesting museum of antique curiosities was
arranged in the room below. Exteriorly, marked improvement was made by
raising the Doric porch to the height of the main building, and
repainting and sanding the whole front in imitation of stone. Quite a
change was made at the same time in the front area by the removal back
to the Landing-place of the portion of Plymouth Rock, which for
forty-six years had here been a prominent object.

The hall is kept open daily (including Sundays in the summer season), at
regular hours, for the accommodation of visitors, a fee of twenty-five
cents being charged. These fees are the only income of the Pilgrim
Society, the fund so accumulated being devoted to the care of the
Pilgrim relics, the monuments, grounds, and historic points of the
Pilgrim locality in Plymouth.

To the improvements made by Mr. Stickney, very important and extensive
ones were carried out by the Society in the periods from February to May
1911, and from December 1911 to March 1912, the hall being closed to the
public during the work. Everything of wood, from the basement to the
roof was removed from the ante-rooms, and also from the main hall and
the one beneath. With steel beams, terra cotta blocks, cement and
marble, thorough work was done in fireproofing the whole structure, so
that the Doric entrance portico, which is separated from the building by
a thick brick wall, now remains as the only combustible part. The cost
of these radical improvements, which seem to sufficiently insure the
protection of the priceless collection of Pilgrim relics, was about
$15,000, paid from the visitors fee fund. It is in contemplation, and
plans have been prepared, for changing the Doric portico from wood to
granite, with monolithic columns. About $20,000 will be needed for this
much desired object, which will make Pilgrim Hall, in its entirety, a
complete and harmonious memorial of the Forefathers; but this laudable
project will have to await the slow accumulation of an annual income
from visitors fees, or the possible generous gift of a descendant or
admirer of our Pilgrim ancestors.

The interior, with marble floors and wainscots, and walls freshly
colored in neutral tints which set off the pictures to much advantage,
now presents a very neat and attractive appearance.

    [Illustration: LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.]

In the marble vestibule hangs a large picture of the “Landing,” done in
distemper, which was presented to the Society by Robert G. Shaw of
Boston. At the right is the curator’s room, on the walls of which hang a
portrait of King James I., together with a number of maps and local
views of Plymouth, illustrative of changes which have taken place. Over
the entrance to the main hall is a large gilded copy of the seal of the
Colony, reproduced from the “Book of Laws,” printed in 1685. The
original seal was adopted probably in 1625. It was taken away during the
administration of the infamous Governor Andros, and never recovered, as
far as is known. This copy is supposed to have been the gift of Samuel
Nicholson, of the Boston Common Council, a native of Plymouth. At the
left of the entrance is the stairway to the lower hall, and the sanitary
conveniences of the building.

The main hall is forty-six by thirty-nine feet, with walls twenty-two
feet high, and is lighted entirely from the roof. At the east end is the
large picture of the “Landing,” thirteen by sixteen feet, painted by
Henry Sargent, of Boston, an amateur artist, and presented by him to the
Society in 1834. Its estimated value was $3,000, and the massive frame
cost about $400. At the left is a portrait of the venerable Dr. James
Thacher, the first secretary of the Pilgrim Society. He was the author
of Thacher’s Military Journal and a History of Plymouth, which has been
considered one of the best ever published. The picture upon the right is
a fine painting and most excellent likeness of the gentleman who in 1880
so disinterestedly and generously remodeled and beautified Pilgrim
Hall,—Joseph Henry Stickney, Esq., of Baltimore. The portrait was
painted by D. G. Pope, a Baltimore artist, and in subject and execution
is worthy of its place in this Pilgrim temple. Beneath the picture the
Society has placed a bronze memorial tablet in grateful remembrance of
Mr. Stickney’s benefactions.

In the middle of the south wall is hung the large copy of Weir’s
Embarkation from Delft Haven, from the large painting in the rotunda of
the Capitol at Washington, done for the Society by Edgar Parker. It is
flanked by several large portraits designated in the catalogue,
including one of Hon. Daniel Webster.

In the centre of the west side hangs the noble gift of ex-Gov. Alexander
H. Rice, of Massachusetts, Charles Lucy’s large painting of the
Departure from Delft Haven. It is of great value, and at a prize
exhibition in England won the first premium of a thousand guineas. It is
altogether different in color and tone from either of the others, and
will bear close sturdy. On its right and left are portraits of
Washington and Edward Everett, with pictures of the house at
Austerfield, England, where Governor Bradford was born, and the only
copy extant of the earliest map of New England territory, made by
William Hack about 1663.

On the north wall at the left of the entrance to the library the fine
historical painting of the Mayflower in Plymouth Harbor by W. F. Halsall
occupies a prominent position, and grouped around it are the portraits
of the Winslow family. These consist of Edward Winslow, of the Mayflower
company who was Governor of Plymouth Colony in 1633-1636 and 1644. This
portrait, and that of Josiah Winslow, who was born in Plymouth in 1628,
son of Governor Edward, and who became the first native governor of the
Colony 1673 to 1680, were probably painted in London by Robert Walker in
1651, the first is therefore regarded as undoubtedly a life-like
portrait of a Mayflower Pilgrim. Others of the group are Penelope, (wife
of Gov. Josiah Winslow) and Gen. John Winslow, great grandson of Gov.
Edward Winslow. The general is depicted in the scarlet uniform of the
British Army. He was second in command in the expedition which removed
the Acadians from Nova Scotia in 1755. The house in which he lived,
built in 1730, is still standing in Plymouth, on the corner of Main and
North streets. It was also the home of James Warren, president of the
Provincial Congress.

At the right of the library entrance hangs the original of Robert W.
Weir’s Embarkation of the Pilgrims from Delft Haven, purchased by the
Society in 1914. From this study, Weir produced the larger painting for
the Capitol rotunda at Washington. Above it is an engraving of the
Sailing of the Mayflower, from Cope’s original painting, which hangs in
the House of Lords in London. There are also engravings of the Signing
of the Compact, and the Landing by different artists, and a colored
lithograph by Allebe of a picture representing the First Religious
service held by the Pilgrims, painted in 1859 by Schwarz of Amsterdam.
The vessel bringing the painting to the United States was burned at sea
by a Confederate privateer during the Civil War. Over the library door
is The Royal Arms, which before the Revolution hung over the judges
bench in the Plymouth Colonial Court House, now our old Town House, and
was carried to Shelburne, Nova Scotia, by Captain Gideon White, a royal
refugee of those times.

Across the head of the hall, under the Sargent picture, are important
historical articles, as the Patent of Plymouth Colony, the chairs of
Elder Brewster and Gov. Carver, which were brought by them in the
Mayflower, the Peregrine White cradle and the Fuller cradle, a chest
which belonged to Myles Standish, a carved pew back from the ancient
parish church at Scrooby, a chair once owned by Gov. Winslow, and the
keystone from an arch in Scrooby Manor. Just inside the door from the
curator’s office is a small steel safe containing Gov. William
Bradford’s bible, printed at Geneva in 1592. During visiting hours the
sacred volume may be seen.

Arranged about the hall on handsome steel tables are exhibition cases of
the finest plate glass in America, and in these are displayed and
numbered conveniently for recognition by catalogue, very many authentic
relics and personal belongings of the Pilgrims and their households. The
first at the right on entering contains articles of the White family,
among them a cabinet brought in the Mayflower by William White, father
of Peregrine, a cane and a candlestick, which he once owned, also a bond
written and signed by Peregrine White, who was born on the Mayflower in
Cape Cod harbor in 1620, and died in Marshfield, 1704. Next is the Alden
case and in it is seen John Alden’s bible dated 1661, a halberd found in
a house he once occupied in Duxbury, a deed signed by this fond lover of
Priscilla, a christening bowl which belonged to Elder William Brewster,
etc. The Standish case is next, and most interesting, for the reason
that there is deposited the famous Damascus sword of the military
Chieftain of the Pilgrims, together with a large pewter platter and iron
pot which he brought in the Mayflower. There are fragments of a quilt
which belonged to Rose, his wife, and a specimen of embroidery or
“sampler” worked by Lorea, his daughter in 1653, with this verse:

    [Illustration: SWORD, POT AND PLATTER OF MYLES STANDISH.]

  Lorea Standish is my name,
  Lord, guide my hart that I may doe Thy will:
  Also fill my hands with such convenient skill
  As will conduce to virtu void of shame,
  And I will give the glory to thy name.

The baby cap and bib worked for her little daughter Lorea by Barbara
Standish has lately been added to the collection. The sword of Myles
Standish is one of the most valuable articles in Pilgrim Hall. General
Grant on his visit to Plymouth, October 14, 1880, was much interested in
this ancient weapon, and handled it with evident satisfaction. The
Arabic inscriptions on the blade have always been a puzzle, and,
notwithstanding many attempts, remained undeciphered until the visit to
the town, June 7, 1881, of Prof. James Rosedale, of Jerusalem, with a
troupe of Arabs from Palestine. Mr. Rosedale being an excellent
linguist, was shown the sword, and pronounced the inscriptions to be of
different dates; one of them in Cufic, very old, and the other in
mediæval Arabic of a later period, but still very ancient. To the last
he readily gave the following translation:—

“_With peace God ruled His slaves (creatures) and with the judgment of
His arm He troubled the mighty of the wicked._”

He had no doubt that the weapon dated back two or three centuries before
the Christian era, and might be much older. It was captured from the
Persians at Jerusalem in 637 by the Saracens, and it is probable that
this famous blade came down to Capt. Standish from the Crusaders, and
possessed an interesting history in his day.

The next case contains numerous valuable books and literary works of
ancient date, the most precious being a copy of John Eliot’s Indian
bible 1685, of which but four copies are now known to be extant. A Dutch
bible and a “Breeches” bible 1599, an Indian vocabulary by Josiah
Cotton, New England’s Memorial by Nathaniel Morton, and the original
records of the Old Colony Club from 1769 to 1773, are also interesting.

The Winslow Case at the right of the Library entrance displays many
belongings of that illustrious family, notably, a part of a chest, a
mortar and pewter plate, brought by Edward Winslow in the Mayflower, a
gold ring and ancient trencher which belonged to Governor Edward
Winslow, General John Winslow’s sword, a dressing case once owned by
Penelope, wife of Governor Josiah Winslow, and bead purse wrought by
that gentle lady, a pair of stiff little shoes worn by Governor Josiah
Winslow when an infant, a slipper and cape once owned by Mrs. Susannah
White, widow of William White, and second wife of Governor Edward
Winslow, and other articles which the catalogues will identify.

    [Illustration: WINSLOW RELICS, PILGRIM HALL.]

The case at the left of the Library contains many papers and documents
of much interest, but of especial note are swords of Gov. John Carver,
Elder William Brewster and Capt. Myles Standish, loaned by the
Massachusetts Historical Society. A novel reminder of the days of
slavery in Massachusetts is a bill of sale of a negro boy in Plymouth in
1753.

The next case has valuable autographs, note books, and a service of
ancient silver tankards and goblets not now in use, but belonging to the
First Church of Christ in Plymouth. There are also the first volume of
the ancient records of the First Church in Plymouth, and the works of
Pastor John Robinson, of Leyden.

The north ante-room is worthy attention of visitors, and contains, with
other things, an old sofa formerly owned by Gov. Hancock, upon which he
probably sat and plotted treason with Samuel Adams against the English
crown. There are pictures of Plymouth, England, and other places in that
country, of Pilgrim interest, together with various commissions,
etchings, views, etc; and a case containing seven swords of notable
personages, which are described in the catalogues.

A fire-proof annex for the valuable library of the Pilgrim Society was
built on the northerly side of the hall in 1904, and on the steel
shelves behind substantial metal lattices, found necessary to protect
the books from persons of predatory inclinations, some 3000 volumes are
arranged in handsome cabinets. Some of these books are very rare indeed,
and if lost or destroyed could not be replaced. The oldest volume bears
the imprint 1559.

Above the bookcases are portraits; among them those of Hon. Joshua
Thomas, the first president of the Pilgrim Society; Hon. John Davis,
editor of Morton’s New England Memorial, and former president of the
Massachusetts Historical Society; and Ephraim Spooner, who was for
thirty-four years deacon of the First Church, in Plymouth, and a very
prominent citizen of the town. He was chairman of the Selectmen through
the Revolutionary War, in which capacity he rendered the country
efficient service, and was likewise for fifty-one years town clerk of
Plymouth. A very quaint painting is the portrait of Elizabeth Wensley,
hanging over the fireplace. She was daughter of William Paddy, and was
born in Plymouth 1641. Her daughter, Sarah, was the wife of Dr. Isaac
Winslow, whose portrait appears in the Winslow group in the main hall.
The great centre table in the library was owned by Gov. Edward Winslow,
and stood in the Council Chamber when he governed the Colony. On top of
one of the book cases is a model of a ship of the “Mayflower” period,
illustrative of the naval architecture and rig of her time.

One of the cases at the foot of the Hall between the ante-rooms holds
the gun barrel with which King Philip was killed, also the original
manuscript of Mrs. Felicia Hemans’ celebrated ode, “The breaking waves
dashed high,” and William Cullen Bryant’s poem, “Wild was the day, the
wintry sea,” both presented by the late James T. Fields of Boston. A
piece of a mulberry tree, planted in the garden of the Manor house at
Scrooby by Cardinal Wolsey, and the trowel used in laying the corner
stone of the National Monument to the Pilgrims, August 2, 1859, are seen
in this case among other articles. In the other there is a book given to
Gov. Bradford by Pastor John Robinson, brought over in the “Mayflower”
by Bradford and afterwards given by him to the church. A book printed by
Elder Brewster and a copy of Seneca’s works owned by Brewster likewise
find place in this case, together with a copy of the first edition of
“Mourt’s Relation,” written in Plymouth in 1621 and published in London
in 1622.

A special case at the head of the Hall contains the oldest state
document in New England, and probably in the United States. This is the
first patent granted to the Plymouth Colonists by the Northern Virginia
Company. A patent was granted by the Virginia Company in the name of
John Wincob, but never used. About the time of the departure of the
Forefathers from England for this country a new company was created by a
royal charter, within the limits of which Plymouth was included, and
this patent dated June 1, 1621 was granted to John Pierce by the
Northern Virginia Company and sent over in the “Fortune,” arriving here
in November of that year. This patent was found in the land office in
Boston, among a mass of old papers, by William Smith, Esq., one of the
land committee. The Hon. John Davis, then editing a new edition of
Morton’s New England Memorials, obtained it for his use in that book,
and from him it came into the possession of the late Nathaniel Morton
Davis, Esq., in whose family it remained until deposited in the hall by
Mrs. William H. Whitman. It bears the seals and signatures of the Duke
of Lenox, the Marquis of Hamilton, the Earl of Warwick, Lord Sheffield,
and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, with the exception that the seal of Hamilton
is missing. A sixth signature, probably that of John Peirce, the party
of the second part, is broken out of the parchment, leaving but a trace
of the letter J. The seal to this signature is also torn away.

From the curator’s office a flight of stairs conducts to the basement,
where all desired conveniences for visitors will be found. In the lower
hall is an interesting museum of articles which have been separated from
the Pilgrim collection, and as pertaining to ancient days in many
instances or as curiosities will well repay examination. Among them is
the frame of the “Sparrowhawk,” wrecked on Cape Cod, at Orleans, in
1626, her company finding refuge and assistance at Plymouth. Her history
is remarkable, as being the first known vessel stranded on the Cape,
which since that time has been the grave yard of fully 2,000 sea-going
craft, with a loss of hundreds of lives. A large placard attached to the
old wreck gives the story. To see these remains of a vessel as old as
the Mayflower, though much smaller, is very suggestive of the perils of
an ocean passage in the days of the Pilgrims.

The bones of the Indian Chief Iyanough are preserved in a special case
in the lower hall, together with a large brass kettle and other
implements found with the skeleton which was discovered at Hyannis in
Barnstable in May, 1861.




                            The Court House


  “Though justice be thy plea, consider this,—
  That in the course of justice none of us should see salvation.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

At our right hand, soon after leaving Pilgrim Hall, we see a large
building with a handsome brick facade, standing a little back from the
street, and fronted by a small park. This is the County Court House,
erected in 1820, and remodeled in 1857. It is one of the finest
buildings of the kind in the State, and the judges of the different
courts give it precedence in point of beauty, convenience, etc., over
all they visit. It has two entrances. The northerly one leads to a
marble corridor, from which is the stairway to the large court room
above, admittance to witness rooms and the Third District Court. The
southerly entrance is to a corridor paved with Vermont marble, and from
which leads a flight of stairs for the court, the bar, officers and
jurymen, main court room, district attorney’s office, and grand jury
room. On the left, below, is the room of the Clerk of Courts, with the
room of the County Treasurer opposite; beyond are rooms for various uses
together with that of the County Commissioners, and the Law Library. The
Library opens from the Commissioner’s room, and also connects by a
stairway with the upper corridor.

    [Illustration: PRISCILLA.]




                       The New Registry Building


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Opposite the Court House, on Russell street, in 1904, the County erected
a very fine and conveniently appointed fireproof building for the
Probate Court and Registry of Deeds. The latter is on the lower floor,
with a large hall for the records and necessary desks and tables to
facilitate the examination of the books. There are also commodious rooms
for the Register and his assistants and the corps of recorders.

    [Illustration: THE NEW REGISTRY BUILDING.]

In the Registry of Deeds are the earliest records of Plymouth Colony, in
the handwriting of the men who are now held in reverence the world over
for their courage in braving the perils of an unknown sea and an equally
unknown shore, to face the dangers of savage men and savage beasts, in
their constancy to what they believed to be their duty, and for planting
on this spot the great principles of a government by the people,—

  “A church without a bishop,
  A state without a king.”

Here is their writing, some of it quaint and crabbed, some fair and
legible. Here, on these very pages, rested the hands fresh from handling
the sword and the musket or the peaceful implements of husbandry, of
Bradford and Brewster and Standish and others of that heroic band. Here
is the original laying-out of the first street,—Leyden street. Here is
the plan of the plots of ground first assigned for yearly use, which
they called, in the tinge of the Dutch tongue they had acquired in their
long residence in Holland, “meersteads.” Here are the simple and yet
wise rules—laws they can hardly be called—laid down for the government
of the infant colony.

Here is the order establishing jury trial in Governor Bradford’s
writing, the order for the first custom laws, the division of cattle
into lots, one cow being divided into thirteen lots. It was four years
after the Landing before any domestic cattle were brought over, and in
order to equalize them they were divided into lots, each family having
one. It must have been a pretty nice affair to divide the milk of one
cow among thirteen parties, to satisfy all.

Here also is the second patent to the company from the Earl of Warwick,
granted in 1629, with its great wax seal engraved for the purpose, and
the original box in which it came from England. Here are signatures,
also, of nearly as much interest as those of the Pilgrims
themselves,—the marks of the original proprietors of all these broad
fields and forests, whose names are represented by signs of bows and
tortoises, of reptiles and animals.

Here are also ancient deeds written in the Indian language, as put in
form by Eliot and Mayo. The record clerk must have had his patience
severely taxed when they were copied.

The Registry of Probate is on the second floor, where with the several
offices there is a beautiful court room for the Probate sessions. The
filing and registry room is a model for convenience in safe keeping and
reference to papers concerning estates.

Opposite Court Square is the Memorial Methodist Episcopal Church, a fine
building erected in 1885-86, which is an ornamental and prominent
feature of the locality.

The building at the right of the church is the Old Colony Club,
instituted in 1769. Next beyond is Russell Building, in which is located
the Pilgrim Bookstore, where will be found a large and varied collection
of souvenirs, views of interesting localities, books of Pilgrim story
and history, post cards and mementos of a visit to “Pilgrim Land.”

    [Illustration: PILGRIM MEERSTEADS.]




                               The Prison


  “I stood in Venice, on the Bridge of Sighs—
  A palace and a prison on each hand.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

In the rear of the Court House stands the former County Prison, a
substantial brick building, with granite trimmings. It is now used for
temporary detention of prisoners at trial, and by agreement with the
Commissioners the town of Plymouth leases a portion of the building for
a police station.

    [Illustration: COUNTY PRISON.]

In May, 1908, the County purchased a large farm at the south part of the
town, and erected suitable buildings of cement concrete, and prisoners
convicted of minor offences are there kept at work with the design of
making the penal institution self-supporting, as well as contributing to
the health and general welfare of offenders detained for short terms.
The new prison is light, commodious and airy, and has 140 cells for men,
and 12 for women. The number of prisoners averages about 120, about half
of them being “trusties,” who perform the farm labor cheerfully, with
but little oversight other than that necessary for direction. The
prisoners were transferred from the old jail in the middle of July,
1911. Sheriff Earl P. Blake rules humanely but firmly, and is as popular
with his criminal household as he is throughout the county. This
rational employment of prison labor for self support, is working
splendidly, and the farm, the first of the kind in this country to be
established on such a basis, is visited with much interest by officials
connected with the criminal institutions of this and other states for
the purpose of learning the methods of administration.




                                The Rock


  “A rock in the wilderness welcomed our sires
    From bondage far over the dark rolling sea;
  On that holy altar they kindled the fires,
    Jehovah, which glow in our bosoms for thee.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Continuing our way along Court Street a little farther, we come to North
Street, at which point the name of the main thoroughfare changes to Main
Street, the business section of the town. Turning down North Street,
leading to the water, in a little distance we come to the brow of the
hill. On the left, Winslow Street winds northward, and on it we see an
old mansion, partially hidden by two noble old linden trees. This house
was built by Edward Winslow, brother to Gen. John Winslow in 1754. He
had the frame got out in England and brought over for this purpose. The
trees in front were planted by his daughter about 1760. Additions were
made to the house in 1898, which is now owned and occupied by Mrs. C. L.
Willoughby.

    [Illustration: WINSLOW HOUSE, BUILT IN 1734.]

Descending the hill to the harbor front at our right a short distance we
see a beautiful and artistic structure of granite in the shape of a
canopy, supported on four columns, and under this is the Rock, now
world-famous. (At this writing in 1919, the comprehensive plans of the
Tercentenary Commission contemplate displacing commercial structures and
improving the harbor front in the vicinage of the Rock.) The upper
portion of the renowned boulder, nearly all of that which is now in
sight, was for one hundred and six years separated from the original
Rock, and during this long period occupied localities remote from the
Landing-place. In 1774, during the series of events leading to the
Revolution, an attempt to raise the Rock for transportation to Town
Square disclosed the fact that the upper portion had become separated
from the lower, probably through action of frost. It was taken to the
Square where it was deposited at the foot of a liberty pole from which
waved a flag bearing the motto, “Liberty or death.”

    [Illustration: NORTH STREET.]

    [Illustration: CANOPY OVER PLYMOUTH ROCK—COLE’S HILL.]

It remained there until 1834, when at a celebration of the Fourth of
July it was carried in procession to Pilgrim Hall, deposited in the
front area, and inclosed by an iron fence. Here the separated part of
the Rock remained forty-six years, its incongruous position away from
the water not being understood by visitors without lengthy explanation.
Mr. Stickney, the gentleman by whose liberality the alterations in
Pilgrim Hall were being made in the summer of 1880, recognized the
impropriety of this condition, and proposed reuniting the parts at the
original Landing-place. The Pilgrim Society readily acceded to this
proposition, and accordingly on Monday, Sept. 27, 1880, without
ceremony, this part of the Rock was placed beneath the Monumental Canopy
at the waterside, the reunited pieces, after a separation of one hundred
and six years, probably now presenting much the same appearance as when
the Pilgrim shallop grazed its side. As to the identity of this Rock,
and the certainty of its being the very one consecrated by the first
touch of Pilgrim feet on this shore, there is not the slightest loophole
for a doubt. Ancient records, now accessible, refer to it as an object
of prominence on the shore, before the building of the wharf about it in
the year 1741. Thomas Faunce, the elder of the church, who was born in
1647 and died in 1746, at the age of 99, was the son of John Faunce, who
came over in the “Ann” in 1623. At the age of ninety-five years hearing
that the Rock, which from youth he had venerated was to be disturbed, he
visited the locality, related the history of the Rock as told him by his
father and contemporary Pilgrims, and in the presence of many witnesses
declared it to be that upon which the Forefathers landed in 1620. Thus
it has been pointed out and identified from one generation to another,
and from the days of the first comers to the present time. Not a shadow
of distrust rests upon it as being the identical spot where the first
landing was effected on the shore of Plymouth.

About a century and three-fourths have elapsed since Elder Faunce gave
his personal testimony, and the lives of two or three elderly people
cover that period, so the evidence is of positive rather than
traditional character.

The Rock was originally a solid boulder of about seven tons, and
undoubtedly a glacial deposit. It is greenish syenite, very hard, and
bears high polish when its fragments are worked for various purposes.




                              The Landing


    [Illustration: The landing]

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Let us picture to ourselves the scene on that Monday morning, when,
after the rest on Clark’s Island they came in their shallop to inspect
the new country that they had providentially found. The wharves and
buildings and every trace of civilization vanish. All is wild and
unknown. Across the harbor comes the boat and every eye anxiously and
keenly scanning the strange shore to discover the presence of human
beings, who will be sure to be enemies. They coast along the shore by
cliff and lowland, hand on weapon, every sense alert for the expected
warwhoop and attack, a steep and sandy cliff, (Cole’s Hill) the base of
which is washed by the water meets their eyes; at its foot a great
boulder, brought from some far-away coast by a glacier, in some
long-gone age. Oval in form, with a flat top, it seems the very place to
bring the great clumsy boat up to, as from its crest they can spring to
the shore, dry-shod, a matter which, after their previous wading in the
ice-cold water at the Cape, is of no small moment. The shallop is
steered to its side; the company steps upon the Rock, and the Landing of
the Forefathers, now so reverently commemorated, is completed. Look
along the shore at this day, north or south, and you may see cliffs as
Cole’s Hill was then, with the mouth of Town Brook near by the Rock,
which later made a safe little harbor for their boats in the rear of the
dwellings which they erected on the south side of Leyden Street.
Divested of romance thrown around it by time, it should be remembered
that the “Landing,” Dec. 21, 1620, was that of the exploring party which
had coasted around the bay, the “Mayflower” then being in Cape Cod
Harbor.

    [Illustration: THE GURNET.]

This party was made up of “ten of their principal men,” according to
Bradford, whose names, as given in “Mourt’s Relation,” were Captain
Standish, Governor Carver, William Bradford, Edward Winslow, John
Tilley, Edward Tilley, John Howland, from Leyden; with Richard Warren,
Stephen Hopkins and Edward Dotey from London, and also two of the
Pilgrim’s seamen, John Allerton and Thomas English. In addition to
these, Captain Jones of the “Mayflower” sent three of his seamen, with
his two mates and pilots named Clarke and Coppin. The master gunner of
the ship by importunity also got leave to accompany them. Thus the
shallop contained eighteen men, twelve of the “Mayflower” company and
six of Jones’ men.

According to “Mourt’s Relation,” the exploring party, having landed from
the Rock, “marched also into the land and found divers cornfields and
little running brooks, a place very good for situation. So we returned
to our Ship again with good news to the rest of the people, which did
much comfort their hearts.”

The “Mayflower” weighs her anchor, Dec. 26, 1620, and spreading sail
moves across the bay. Feeling carefully their way, they pass the Gurnet
and navigate along the channel inside the beach, until in the wide bend
towards the town just above the present Beach wharf, as is believed by
those who have studied the situation, the anchor is dropped, not to be
again disturbed until the following spring. But the location is not yet
settled. Some, with the alarm of the recent encounters vividly impressed
upon them, think the Island, surrounded by water and easily defended,
would be a good place. Jones river, sending its unimpeded waters to meet
the waves of the bay, attracts the attention of others. “So in the
morning, after we had called on God for direction, we came to this
resolution, to go presently ashore again, and to take a better view of
two places which we thought most fitting for us; for we could not now
take time for further search or consideration, our vituals being much
spent, especially our beer, and it being now the 19th of December (old
style). After our landing and visiting the places, so well as we could,
we came to a conclusion, by most voices, to set on a high ground, where
there is a great deal of land cleared, and hath been planted with corn
three or four years ago; and there is a very sweet brook runs under the
hillside, and many delicate springs of as good water as can be drunk,
and where we may harbor our shallops and boats exceedingly well; and in
this brook fish in their season; on the further side of the river also
much corn ground cleared. In one field is a great hill on which we point
to make a platform, and plant our ordance, which will command all around
about. From thence we may see into the bay, and far into the sea; and we
may see thence Cape Cod. Our greatest labor will be the fetching of our
wood, which is half a quarter of an English mile; but there is enough so
far off. What people inhabit here we yet know not, for as yet we have
seen none. So there we made our rendezvous, and a place for some of our
people, about twenty, resolving in the morning to come all ashore and to
build houses.”




                              Cole’s Hill


  “Not Winter’s sullen face,
  Not the fierce, tawny race
    In arms arrayed,
  Not hunger shook their faith;
  Not sickness’ baleful breath,
  Not Carver’s early death,
    Their souls dismayed.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Ascending the broad flight of steps leading to the brow of the hill, and
turning to the left, we tread upon sacred, hallowed ground. Here were
buried, in that dark, sad winter in which they landed, half of their
little band. The terrible tale is told concisely by the narrator already
quoted. “This month (March) thirteen of our number die. And in three
months past dies half our company—the greatest part in the depth of
winter, wanting houses and other comforts, being afflicted with the
scurvy and other diseases which their long voyage and unaccommodate
condition brought upon them, so as there die sometimes two or three a
day. Of a hundred persons scarce fifty remaining; the living scarce able
to bury the dead; the well not sufficient to tend the sick, there being
in their time of greatest distress, but six or seven, who spare no pains
to help them.” They buried them on this hill, and levelled the graves,
and in the spring following planted grain above them, that the Indians
might not know the extent of their great loss.

    [Illustration: PILGRIM EXILES.]

At four different times the remains have been discovered. In 1735, in a
great rain, the water, rushing down Middle Street to the harbor, caused
a deep gully there, exposing human remains and washing them into the
sea. In 1855, workmen engaged in digging trenches for the water works
found parts of five skeletons. The graves were in the roadway, about
five rods south of the foot of Middle Street. One of the skulls was sent
to a competent anatomist in Boston, and was pronounced to be of the
Caucasian race. The remains were carefully gathered and placed in a
metallic box, properly inscribed, and interred on Burial Hill,
subsequently being deposited in the chamber of the canopy over the Rock,
at its completion in the year 1867. Again, on the 8th of October, 1883,
during grading on the hill, other remains were found which were
carefully removed, and afterwards, on the 20th of November, enclosed in
a lead box and re-interred on the precise spot of their original burial.
Directly over the grave a granite slab has been placed by order of the
town, bearing an appropriate inscription. On the 27th of November, 1883,
others still were found which lie undisturbed near the last, and their
exact resting-place is designated on the memorial slab above mentioned.
Cole’s Hill has other histories, also. From the first days its position
above and commanding the harbor led to its being selected as a place of
defence. In 1742 the General Court granted a sum of money to the town to
erect a battery here. In 1775, the old defence having gone to decay, a
new one was built and manned, and continued to be kept up during the
war. In 1814 still another fort was thrown up here, and placed in charge
of companies of soldiers stationed in the town. In 1915-16 the brow of
the hill southeast of Middle Street was filled off, continuing the
esplanade from North to Leyden Street, much improving former conditions.
(Extensive changes are about to be made on the level of the hill, and
the Pilgrim graves recovered from the highway and properly marked.)




                             Leyden Street


    (Originally named First Street, afterwards in the Records called
         Great and Broad Street; named Leyden Street in 1823.)

  “There first was heard the welcome strain
  Of axe and hammer, saw and plane.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Walking around the brow of the hill through Carver Street, we pass the
handsome vestry of the Baptist church, built in 1915, and next the
Universalist church, erected in 1826 on the spot where stood the ancient
Allyne House, one of the last of its architecture to disappear in the
colony. Standing on this elevation, we can see the reason for the
selection of this place for the settlement. There below us, are the
waters of “the very sweet brook,” into which the “many delicate springs”
still continue to run. How sweet they must have tasted to the palates of
those poor stormtossed wayfarers, who for months had been drinking the
ship’s stale water! Sweet and pure they are now as they were then. Then
the brook came to the sea in its natural wildness, unfettered by bridge
or dam. Where it met the waters of the ocean was quite a wide estuary,
so that before the lower bridge was built schooners of considerable size
were wintered here nearly up to the second bridge. Beyond it is the land
where there was “much corn land cleared.” Just below the junction of
Carver and Leyden streets they built their first building, a “common
house.” In 1801, in digging a cellar at that place, several tools and a
plate of iron were found, which without doubt were in this “common
house.” This house was about twenty feet square, and thatched. It took
fire in the roof Jan. 14, 1621, and the thatch was burnt. It was a
common log house, such as built now by Western pioneers, and probably
was not used many years. These articles found were probably left in it
unnoticed when vacated and only came to light when the little colony to
whom they were so useful had expanded into a great nation. A sign and
bronze tablet now mark this spot.

“Mourt’s Relation” furnishes us an interesting record:—

“Thursday, the 28th (old style) of December, so many as could went to
work on the hill, where we proposed to build our platform for our
ordnance, and which doth command all the plain and the bay, and from
whence we may see far into the sea, and might be easier impaled, having
two rows of houses and a fair street. So in the afternoon we went to
measure out the grounds; and first we took notice how many families
there were, willing all single men that had no wives to join with some
family, as they thought fit, so that we might build fewer houses; which
done, and we reduced them to nineteen families.

“To greater families we alloted larger plots; to every person half a
pole in breadth and three in length, and so lots were cast where every
man should lie; which was done and staked out,” and this was laying out
of Leyden Street, so named in 1823. An unfinished plan of this street is
to be seen on the old records of the Colony, at the Registry of Deeds.
The full plot of the little settlement was about as shown in the annexed
line drawing.

    [Illustration: Settlement plot]

                               Burial Hill.
  _The   _Edw Winslow._               _Town     _Gov. Bradford._
 Brook_                              Square._
         _Francis Cooke._
         _Mr. Isaac Allerton._
         _John Billington._
         _A Highway leading to                  _King St. now Main St._
         Town Brook._
         _Mr. William Brewster._      _First    _Stephen Hopkins._
                                    Street—now
                                   Leyden St._
         _John Goodman._                        _John Howland._
         _Peter Brown._                         _Samuel Fuller._
         _Common House._                        Cole’s Hill
                                                First Burial Place.
                                The Harbor

    [Illustration: POST OFFICE AND CUSTOM HOUSE.]

Continuing up Leyden street to Main street, we pass on our left the U.
S. Government post office and custom house building, a handsome Colonial
edifice completed in 1915. This site is peculiarly and historically
appropriate for the Federal building, as it is the lot assigned to
William Brewster, Dec. 28, 1620, (old style), in the laying out just
described. He was the elder or spiritual teacher of the Pilgrims, so on
his homestead where he taught religious liberty which distinguishes our
country, the Nation places its representative cornerstone—a most happy
coincidence of the marking of Colonial and National beginnings. The
public fountain at the corner gives invitation to “freely drink and
quench your thirst” from the Pilgrim Spring on the Brewster meerstead,
the water of which is sent by electric power from the cool, copiously
gushing source near the bank of Town Brook, 200 feet away.




                            Plymouth in 1627


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

In 1627, Isaac DeRaiseres, an officer from the Dutch Colony of New
Netherland, now New York, visited Plymouth, and in a letter to Holland
sends the following description of appearance of the place:—

    [Illustration: Pilgrims and stronghouse]

“New Plymouth lies on the slope of a hill stretching east toward the sea
coast, with a broad street about a cannon shot of eight hundred (yards)
long, leading down the hill, with a (street) crossing in the middle
northwards to the rivulet and southwards to the land.[1] The houses are
constructed of hewn planks, with gardens also enclosed behind and at the
sides with hewn planks, so that their houses and court-yards are
arranged in very good order, with a stockade against a sudden attack;
and at the ends of the street are three wooden gates. In the centre, on
the cross street, stands the Governor’s house, before which is a square
enclosure, upon which four patereros (steen-stucken) are mounted, so as
to flank along the streets. Upon the hill they have a large square
house, with a flat roof, made of thick sawn planks, stayed with oak
beams, upon the top of which they have six cannons, which shoot iron
balls of four and five pounds, and command the surrounding country.”


[1]An error in statement of the points of the compass is here evident.
    It should be “southwards to the rivulet and northwards to the land.”




                              Town Square


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Above Main and Market streets we enter Town Square, shaded by its noble
elms, planted in 1784. On the corner of Main Street, a large building
was built in 1875 by Mayflower Lodge I. O. O. F., covering the spot on
which stood the house of William Bradford, so many years, the Pilgrim
governor. It was burned January 10, 1904, and the “Governor Bradford
Building,” a handsome brick structure with stores and offices took its
place. A bronze tablet calls attention to the locality.

    [Illustration: GOV. BRADFORD’S HOUSE IN 1621.]

Above this is the Congregational Church, known as the “Church of the
Pilgrimage.”

The present building was erected in 1840, and stands very near the site
of the First Meeting-house in Plymouth, built in 1638. A tablet on the
front of the church bears the following inscription:—

  This tablet is inscribed in grateful memory of the Pilgrims and of
  their successors who, at the time of the Unitarian controversy in
  1801, adhered to the belief of the Fathers, and on the basis of the
  original creed and covenant perpetuated, at great sacrifice, in the
  Church of the Pilgrimage, the evangelical faith and fellowship of the
  Church of Scrooby, Leyden, and the “Mayflower,” organized in England
  in 1606.

    [Illustration: CHURCH OF THE PILGRIMAGE.]

Opposite is an old building, now the Town House, on which is a
historical bronze tablet. It was built in 1749 as a court house, the
town contributing a part of the cost for the privilege of using it. When
the new court house was built, in 1820, this old colonial building was
purchased by the town and in it most of the town officers are located,
also public sanitary conveniences. At the head of the square is the
First Parish Church, the original church of the Pilgrims.

The first “Meeting-house,” as the Pilgrims called church edifices, to
distinguish them from houses of worship of the established church, has
been proved, by the investigations of Mr. W. T. Davis, to have stood on
the north side of the square, near the spot occupied by the present
Governor Bradford building. Of this we know but little, except that it
was erected in 1638, (the Forefathers before that time worshipping in
the fort on the hill), and had a bell. In 1683 a new building was
erected, not on the same lot, but farther out at the head of the square.
This was forty-five by forty feet, sixteen feet in the walls, had a
Gothic roof, diamond window glass and a bell.

In 1744, still another church was built on or near the same site. This
remained until 1830, when a Gothic edifice was erected. This stood
farther up the hill than the previous one, and was destroyed by fire
Nov. 22, 1892. The present stone building was completed and dedicated on
December 21, 1899, and has on its front, tablets designating it as the
first church. Its entrance portal is a fine reproduction of the arched
doorway of the old church at Austerfield, England, in which Gov.
Bradford was christened.

    [Illustration: CHURCH OF THE FIRST PARISH.]




                              Burial Hill


  “The Pilgrim Fathers are at rest;
    When Summer’s throned on high,
  And the world’s warm breast is in verdure dressed,
    Go, stand on the hill where they lie.”

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Beyond and above Town Square stretches the verdant slope consecrated
from the earliest years of the colony as a place of sepulture. Here
repose the ashes of those who survived the first winter. “In one field a
great hill, on which we point to make a platform and plant our ordnance,
which will command all round about. From thence we may see into the bay
and far into the sea.” Marble tablets mark the location of the Old Fort
and Watch Tower, while numerous stones and monuments, which can easily
be deciphered, point out resting places of Pilgrims and descendants.

    [Illustration: GOV. BRADFORD’S MONUMENT, BURIAL HILL.]

The marble obelisk in memory of Gov. William Bradford, the second
governor, with its Hebrew text, now difficult to decipher, but
translated by good authority to read: “Let the right hand of the Lord
awake,” together with a Latin inscription, freely rendered: “Do not
basely relinquish what the Fathers with difficulty attained,” erected in
1825, is near to us, and around it are numerous stones, marking the
graves of his descendants. On the south side of the Governor’s obelisk
is inscribed:

  H I William Bradford of Austerfield Yorkshire England. Was the son of
  William and Alice Bradford, He was Governor of Plymouth Colony from
  1621 to 1633 1635 1637 1639 to 1643 1645 to 1657

    [Illustration: GRAVE OF THOMAS CLARK, 1697.]

On the north side:

  Under this stone rest the ashes of William Bradford a zealous Puritan
  & sincere Christian Gov. of Ply. Col. from 1621 to 1657, (the year he
  died) aged 69, except 5 yrs, which he declined.

A little back, on a path to the rear entrance to the hill is the oldest
stone in the cemetery. It must be remembered that for many years the
colonists had far other cares, and many other uses for their little
savings, than to provide stones to mark their graves. These had to be
imported from England at much cost, and consequently it was some years
before any were able to afford the expense. The oldest stone is that to
the memory of Edward Gray, 1681. Mr. Gray was a merchant, and one of the
wealthiest men in the colony. Near the head of this path is a stone to
William Crowe, 1683-84. Near by is one to Thomas Clark, 1697,
erroneously reputed to have been the mate of the “Mayflower,” but who
came in the “Ann,” in 1623. Clark’s Island received its name from John
Clark, now known to have been the mate of the “Mayflower.” Beside the
grave of Thomas Clark is that of his son, Nathaniel, who was one of the
councillors of Sir Edward Andros, Governor of New England. Other old
stones are those of Mrs. Hannah Clark, 1697; and John Cotton, 1699.
These are all the original stones bearing dates in the seventeenth
century. There are some with dates of that century which have been
erected since, by descendants, including the monument to Governor
Bradford, before alluded to: the fine granite shaft to Robert Cushman;
and the stone over the remains of John Howland. The inscription on the
latter stone reads as follows:—

  Here ended the Pilgrimage of JOHN HOWLAND who died February 23, 167
  2-3, aged above 80 years. He married Elizabeth daughter of JOHN TILLEY
  who came with him in the Mayflower Dec. 1620. From them are descended
  a numerous posterity.

  “Hee was a godly man and an ancient professor in the wayes of Christ.
  Hee was one of the first comers into this land and was the last man
  that was left of those that came over in the Shipp called the
  Mayflower that lived in Plymouth.”—(Plymouth Records.)

Near the Bradford monument are the graves of his family. The face of the
stone at the grave of his son, Major William Bradford, shelled off in
1876-77, but the inscription has since been retraced. The cut following
is reproduced from a view taken of the original, and is an exact
_facsimile_—

  Here lyes ye body of ye honourable Major William Bradford, who expired
  Feb’ ye 20th, 1703-4, aged 79 years.

  He lived long, but still was doing good,
  And in his country’s service lost much blood,
  And a life well spent, he’s now at rest,
  His very name and memory is blest.

    [Illustration: GRAVE OF MAJOR WILLIAM BRADFORD.]

At the grave of another son the headstone reads as follows:

  Here lyes interred ye body of Mr. Joseph Bradford, son of the late
  Honorable William Bradford, Esq., Governor of Plymouth, Colony, who
  departed this life July the 10th, 1715 in the eighty-fifth year of his
  age.

The following are some of the inscriptions of the older stones:

  Here lyes ye body of Mrs. Hannah Sturtevant, aged about sixty-four
  years. Dec. in March, 1708-9.

  Here lyes buried the body of Mr. Thomas Faunce, ruling elder of the
  First Church of Christ in Plymouth. Deceased Feb’y, 27, 1745, in the
  ninety-ninth year of his age.

  The fathers—where are they?
  Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.

    [Illustration: GRAVE OF DR. FRANCIS LEBARON.
    “THE NAMELESS NOBLEMAN.”]

(Elder Faunce was the last who held the office of ruling elder in the
church. He was contemporary with many of the first comers, and from him
comes much of the information we possess about the localities now
venerated.)

The epitaphs in old graveyards possess much interest to the lovers of
the quaint and curious, and this first cemetery of New England is not
without its attraction of that kind. The following are some of the most
interesting:—

  This stone is erected to the memory of that unbiased judge, faithful
  officer, sincere friend, and honest man, Col. Isaac Lothrop who
  resigned his life on the 26th day of April, 1750, in the forty-third
  year of his age.

  Had Virtue’s charms the power to save
  Its faithful votaries from the grave,
  This stone had ne’er possessed the fame
  Of being marked with Lothrop’s name.

A row of stones on the top of the hill, near the marble tablet marking
the locality of the Watch Tower, is raised to the memory of the
ministers of the First Parish. Back of these is the Judson lot, where
the sculptor’s chisel has perpetuated the remembrance of Rev. Adoniram
Judson, the celebrated missionary to Burmah, whose body was committed to
the keeping of Old Ocean. On the westerly side of the hill is a monument
erected by Stephen Gale of Portland, Me:—

  To the memory of seventy-two seamen, who perished in Plymouth Harbor,
  on the 26th and 27th days of December, 1778, on board the private
  armed brig, General Arnold, of twenty guns, James Magee, of Boston,
  Commander; sixty of whom were buried in this spot.

About midway on the easterly slope a little to the north of the main
path up the hill, on the stone to a child aged one month:—

  He glanced into our world to see
  A sample of our miserie.

On a stone a little farther north, to the memory of four children, aged
respectively thirty-six, twenty-one, seventeen and two years:—

  Stop traveller and shed a tear
  Upon the fate of children dear.

On the path towards the schoolhouse on a stone to a woman with an infant
child by her side:—

  Come view the seen, ’twill fill you with surprise,
  Behold the loveliest form in nature dies;
  At noon she flourished, blooming, fair and gay;
  At evening an extended corpse she lay.

Near the entrance to this path is the grave of a Revolutionary soldier,
Capt. Jacob Taylor, died 1788:—

  Through life he braved her foe, if great or small,
  And marched out foremust at his country’s call.

On this path is the grave of Joseph Bartlett, who died in 1703:—

  Thousands of years after blest Abel’s fall,
    ’Twas said of him, being dead he speaketh yet;
  From silent grave methinks I hear a call:—
    Pray, fellow mortals, don’t your death forget.
  You that your eyes cast on this grave,
  Know you a dying time must have.

Near the same place is a curious stone, to the memory of John Cotton:—

  Here lyes interred three children, viz., three sons of Rev. Mr. John
         Cotton, who died in the work of the gospel ministry at
                   Charlestown, South Carolina, Sept.
      ye 18th, 1869, where he had great success, and seven sons of
            Josiah Cotton, Esq., who died in their infancy.

On the southerly slope of the hill, near a pine grove, is a stone to a
child:—

  The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set
  on edge.

On the stone to the memory of Thomas Jackson, died in 1794:—

  The spider’s most attenuated thread
  Is cord, is cable, to man’s tender tie.

      MARTHA COTTON, 1796.
  Many years I lived
  Many painful scenes I passed,
  Till God at last
  Called me home.

In a long lot enclosed with an iron fence:—

  F. W. Jackson. obit M. C. H. 23, 1797, 1 yr. 7 dys,

  Heav’n knows what man
  He might have made. But we
  He died a most rare boy.

    [Illustration: FANNIE CROMBIE.]

  As young as beautiful; and soft as young,
  And gay as soft; and innocent as gay.

A little farther on in this path is the stone to Tabitha Plasket, 1807,
the epitaphs, on which, written supposedly by herself, breaths such a
spirit of defiance that it attracts much attention:—

    Adieu, vain world, I’ve seen enough of thee;
    And I am careless what thou say’st of me;
    Thy smiles I wish not,
    Nor thy frowns I fear,
  I am now at rest, my head lies quiet here,

Mrs. Plasket, in her widowhood, taught a private school for small
children, at the same time, as was the custom of her day, doing her
spinning. Her mode of punishment was to pass skeins of yarn under the
arms of the little culprits, and hang them upon pegs. A suspended row
was a ludicrous sight.

Mr. Joseph Plasket (husband of Tabitha) died in 1794, at the age of
forty-eight years. The widow wrote his epitaph as follows:—

  All you that doth behold my stone,
  Consider how soon I was gone.
  Death does not always warning give,
  Therefore be careful how you live.
  Repent in time, no time delay,
  I in my prime was called away.

Nearly opposite this is one on a very young child:—

  The babe that’s caught from womb and breast,
  Claim right to sing above the rest,
  Because they found the happy shore
  They never saw or sought below.

As this path comes out on the brow of the hill, near a white fence, is a
stone to Elizabeth Savery, 1831:—

  Remember me as you pass by,
  As you are now, so once was I;
  As I am now, so you will be,
  Therefore prepare to follow me.

On the path by the fence in the rear of the hill:—

  The father and the children dead,
  We hope to Heaven their souls have fled.
  The widow now alone is left,
  Of all her family bereft.
  May she now put her trust in God,
  To heal the wound made by His rod.

On a stone raised to the memory of a child:—

  He listened for a while to hear
  Our mortal griefs; then turned his ear
  To angel harps and songs, and cried
  To join their notes celestial, sigh’d and died.

    [Illustration: GRAVE OF NATHANIEL GOODWIN.]

A little from the path up Burial Hill to the left, just below the tall
Cushman monument, a marble tablet designates the spot where the fort of
the little colony was situated, quite a portion of its outline still
being distinct, particularly at the easterly corner. We can see at once
with what sagacity the site was chosen, undoubtedly by Standish. It
commanded Leyden Street, and the approaches from the brook over which
the Indians came.

    [Illustration: THE OLD FORT AND FIRST MEETING HOUSE, 1621.]

Standing here, we have a view of the southern part of the town. The blue
heights of Manomet Hills shut in the horizon. Beyond them lies the
little hamlet of South Plymouth, a rural village with summer hotels, the
Ardmore Inn and Idlewild hotels of considerable celebrity, especially
among sportsmen, to which the very spacious and beautiful Mayflower Inn
has been added in 1917. On this side is the village of Chiltonville,
with its churches and factories. Far down to the shore, near the head of
the Beach, is the Hotel Pilgrim. Just south of the hotel are the
beautiful level lawns and attractive cozy club-house of the Plymouth
Country Club, the golf links being situated on the opposite side of
Warren avenue, running over high, clear, breezy fields and commanding a
splendid view of ocean and of land. Near lies the southerly portion of
the main part of the town, divided by the brook. Across the stream, or
pond, just beyond Main Street extension with its bridge built in 1907-8,
is the public common, laid out very early as a “Training Green,” the
name it bears today. It is an attractive square surrounded with large
elm trees, and in its centre stands the monument erected in 1869 to the
memory of the Soldiers and Sailors of Plymouth, who gave their lives for
the country in the Civil War. Before the Pilgrims came the Green was an
Indian cornfield.

    [Illustration: MANOMET BLUFFS.]




                             Watson’s Hill


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Above the Green is Watson’s Hill, now covered with houses. This was the
“_Cantauganteest_” of the Indians, one of their favorite resorts where
they had their summer camps, and on the level below planted their corn.
It is famous as the opening scene of the treaty with Massasoit, made
April 1, 1621. Gov. Bradford had a tract of land assigned him here on
which to raise corn, and to this day portions of the hill remain in the
Bradford name and others of direct descent from him.

    [Illustration: WATSON’S HILL.]




                            The Watch Tower


A little to the north of the site of the old fort another tablet marks
the place of the brick watch tower erected in 1643. The locality of this
tower is indicated by four stone posts set in the ground to mark its
corners. The brick foundations are still there, about a foot below the
surface, and the old hearthstone on which the Pilgrims built their watch
fires still lies where they placed it, on the southerly side of the
enclosure. The location of the tower was discovered many years ago in
digging a grave, when the sexton came upon the foundation. The town
records of Sept. 23, 1643, have the following entry in regard to it: “It
is agreed upon the whole that there shall be a watch house forthwith,
built of brick, and that Mr. Grimes will sell us the brick at eleven
shillings a thousand.”

    [Illustration: SITE OF THE WATCH TOWER, 1643.
    Back of this is seen the lot of Rev. Adoniram Judson, the famous
    missionary to Burmah.]

This is the first mention of brick in the records of the colony, and it
is to be presumed that this marks about the time of the first
brickyards. The cause of the tower being built was probably the
threatenings of the Indians, which resulted in the Narragansett war.

    [Illustration: ALONG THE WHARVES.]

Still later, in 1676, another fortification was erected on the hill,
presumably covering the same area, enclosing a hundred feet square,
“with palisadoes ten and one half feet high, and three pieces of
ordnance planted on it.” The town agreed with Nathaniel Southworth to
build a watch house, “which is to be sixteen feet in length, twelve feet
in breadth, and eight feet stud, to be walled with boards, and to have
two floors, the upper floor to be six feet above the tower, to batten
the walls and make a small pair of stairs in it, the roof to be covered
with shingles, and a chimney to be built in it. For the said work he is
to have eight pounds, either in money or other pay equivalent.” This
being only thirty-two years after the building of the brick tower, it
would seem as if the latter could hardly have fallen or been taken down,
and it is possible if not probable, that the wooden watch tower was
built upon the old brick one; but of this we can only conjecture. This
was in the period of King Philip’s war in 1675. From here might have
been seen the blaze of the houses of Eel River (now Chiltonville), and
the terrible warwhoop almost heard as the savages burst upon the little
hamlet near Bramhall’s corner on that peaceful Sabbath in March, 1676,
when they left eleven dead bodies of women and children and smoking
ruins to mark their savage onslaught.




                               The Harbor


    [Illustration: OFF BEACH POINT.]

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

We have, from the easterly brow of Burial Hill, a beautiful picture of
the harbor and its surroundings. Below us the ground slopes to the
water, cut into terrace below terrace, with the buildings upon them. At
its foot are the wharves and harbor, and below it the Beach near which
the “Mayflower” swung at her anchors. Manomet is the range of misty blue
hills stretching into the bay on the right. Kingston and Duxbury, with
Captain’s Hill are on the left, and far out Clark’s Island, Saquish, and
the Gurnet, with the thin, sandy strip of beach joining the latter
headlands. On the Gurnet is Fort Andrew, and at Saquish is Fort
Standish, both earthworks, built by the Government during the Civil war
of 1861-65, but now dismantled and unused. These sites are the property
of the United States. The Gurnet, it is said, takes its name from a
somewhat similar promontory in the English channel, near Plymouth,
England. On it are located a United States life-saving station, twin
lighthouses and a Dabol trumpet fog signal. A whistling buoy at the
entrance of the harbor, opposite the Gurnet, gives warning in thick
weather, of the dangerous Brown’s Island shoal. Saquish is an Indian
word signifying an abundance of clams. Clark’s Island was named from the
mate of the “Mayflower,” who commanded the shallop on the expedition
when the island was discovered.

The following statistics were furnished by Capt. A. M. Harrison from the
United States Survey of 1853-57: From the shore end of Long Wharf, in a
straight line, to Gurnet Light, the distance is four and
seven-sixteenths statute miles, or, three and seven-eighths nautical
miles. The length of Plymouth Beach, from the foot of Manomet Hills to
the beacon on extreme point, is three and five-sixteenths statute miles,
or two and seven-eights nautical miles. The length of the Beach from its
junction with the mainland to the beacon, is two and five-eighths
statute miles, or two and one-fourth nautical miles.




                    Voyage of the Mayflower Shallop


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

From Burial Hill we can overlook the whole course of that boat
expedition which started on its voyage of discovery from the “Mayflower”
in Provincetown Harbor, directly opposite us across the bay. Coasting
along the inside of Cape Cod at the right, its sandy shore hidden by
distance from our sight, some of the exploring party on foot, forcing
their way through the tangled wilderness, sometimes wading in half
frozen water through the surf or across brooks, they slowly make their
way. Constantly on the alert, and two or three times attacked and
beating off their assailants, the shallop now with all the party aboard
nears Manomet point. It begins to snow and rain and the wind to blow and
the seas to rise. Now the hinge of the rudder breaks, and oars are got
out to steer with. Master Coppin, the pilot, bids them to be of good
cheer, for he sees the harbor which he had promised them.

    [Illustration: THE MAYFLOWER IN PLYMOUTH HARBOR.]

Across the bay they drive, keeping on a press of sail to make the
desired harbor before nightfall when crash goes the mast, broken into
three pieces, and the shallop is near being wrecked. Now the flood-tide
takes them and bears them in past the Gurnet nose, and Master Coppin,
finding himself in a strange place that he had never seen before, throws
up his hands and exclaims: “The Lord be merciful to us, I never saw this
place before,” and in his terror would have run the boat on shore, “in a
cove full of breakers,” between the Gurnet and Saquish; “but a lusty
seaman which steered bade those that rowed, if they were men, about with
her, or else they were all cast away.” The short twilight of the winter
day had faded into darkness, as the storm-tossed and dispirited company
found themselves “under the lee of a small island.” There it is before
us, the third highland to the left—the first being the Gurnet and the
second Saquish. They landed, and kept their watch that night in a rain.
Gov. Bradford, in his history, gives us a few more particulars: “In the
morning they find the place to be a small island secure from Indians.
And this being the last day of the week, they here dry their stuff, fix
their pieces, rest themselves, return God thanks for their many
deliverances and here the next day keep their Christian Sabbath.”
Tradition says that from a large rock with a flat top that is there now,
bearing the inscription, “On the Sabbath day we rested,” the first
prayer ascended on this shore; and there, for the first time in New
England, praise and thanks were given to that watchful Providence that
had guided and guarded them. The next day, Monday, they sailed up to the
shore below us, and, stepping on Plymouth Rock, made the exploration
which ultimately determined them to fix upon this place for their
plantation.




                              Morton Park


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

One of the most attractive spots in old Plymouth and one that the casual
visitor does not always see, is Morton Park. Lying a little more than a
mile from the town centre it makes a convenient pleasure-ground for
Plymouth people, and the beauty of the place is such as to attract all
lovers of woodland scenery. Nature has done her most to make the park
charming, and man has very wisely made little attempt to improve it.
Nearly 200 acres there are, consisting of deep woods and open country,
hills and valleys, brooks and ponds.

    [Illustration: ENTRANCE TO MORTON PARK.]

The park nearly surrounds Little Pond, consisting of forty acres, and
borders for a mile on the historic Billington Sea, which has 308 acres.
Roads and paths have been laid out in romantic situations, and some
trees planted, but otherwise the wild woodland cleared of underbrush
remains in its natural state. In 1889 the land was given to the town by
several public-spirited citizens, and the park was named for Nathaniel
Morton, Esq., one of its principal donors, who during his life made it
his special pride, and gave his money generously for its improvement.




                               Town Brook


  “And there is a very sweet brooke runnes under the hillside, and many
  delicate springs of as good water as can be drunke.”
                                                          GOV. BRADFORD.

    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

At the foot of Burial Hill, on the south side, the Town Brook flows
through the centre of the town, “vexed in all its seaward course by
bridges, dams and mills.” Along the banks the Pilgrims erected their
first dwelling-houses and brought water from “the very sweet brooke”
below, into which the “many delicate springs” still continue to run.

    [Illustration: OUTLET OF BILLINGTON SEA.]

It is a favorite resort for artists who delight in sketching the
picturesque scenery and ancient architecture. One of these springs of
deliciously clear cold water, is forced up from near the brook by
electric power, and runs out in a fountain at the corner of Leyden and
Main Streets, on land once owned by Elder Brewster as previously noted.
During the summer many thousands are here refreshed, and while citizens
much enjoy the cooling draughts, visitors highly commend the public
provision which enables them to partake of the waters of a spring, from
which the Pilgrims themselves daily obtained their supply “of as good
water as can be drunke.”

The stream proceeds from Billington Sea about two miles distant from the
town. It furnishes a valuable water power at the present, and in the
days of the Pilgrims, and for nearly two centuries after, it abounded
with alewives almost at their doors, affording an important resource for
the supply of their wants. The tide flowed for some distance up this
stream and formed a convenient basin for the reception and safe shelter
of the shallops and other vessels employed in their earlier enterprises
of fishing and traffic. Under authority of a Legislative act the Town of
Plymouth purchased this estuary in 1909 that the area and surrounding
may be subject to public improvements. From Watson’s Hill, over this
brook, where Market Street crosses it, came the great sachem Massasoit,
with twenty of his braves, on a visit to the Pilgrims, when was
concluded that treaty April 1, 1621, which during nearly fifty-five
years conduced so effectually to the safety and permanence of the
colony.




                               Old Houses


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

Plymouth contains many old buildings antedating the Revolution, but they
have been repaired and modernized so that they do not have that
appearance at present, and visitors are often disappointed in not
finding the antique structures which they expected. Old people, now
living, can remember when several of these buildings had “Dutch ovens”
and chimneys built on the outside.

Old houses still remaining are the Kendall Holmes house on Winter
street, built in 1666; the Leach house, on Summer Street, built in 1679;
the Howland house, 1666; the Shurtleff house, 1698; the Crowe house,
1664; and the William Harlow house, built in 1677, partly of the
material of the old fort on Burial Hill. The Howland descendants
recently purchased the old homestead on Sandwich street, and in the
spring of 1913, put it in complete repair, designing it as a place of
annual meeting, and for public visitation in the summer season. The Cole
blacksmith shop, 1684, which composed part of a building at the corner
of Leyden and Main streets, and was regarded with much interest by
visitors, was badly damaged by fire April 16, 1913, and has been
replaced by a very handsome store building. It is a coincidence that
this old smithy which the Pilgrims knew on the first Pilgrim street,
should have burned on the anniversary of the day the “Mayflower” sailed
on her return voyage, after passing the winter here in Plymouth harbor.

    [Illustration: WM. CROWE HOUSE, 1664.]

The Winslow house on North Street is a good example of the colonial
style of architecture. It was built about 1754 by Edward Winslow, who
was a great-grandson of Gov. Winslow, of the colony. He purchased the
land from Consider, a grandson of John Howland, who was one of the
“Mayflower” passengers. Additions have recently been made to the house
which is now owned and occupied by Mrs. C. L. Willoughby. In this house
then owned by her father, Charles Jackson, Miss Lydia Jackson was
married to the famed scholar and philosopher, Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    [Illustration: WILLIAM HARLOW HOUSE, 1677.]

The Sergeant William Harlow House was built in 1677 of timbers from the
fort on Burial Hill, which was taken down at the close of the King
Phillip War. It has recently been purchased by the Plymouth Antiquarian
Society and is now open to the public.

On the corner of Main and North Streets, built in 1730, still stands the
house of General John Winslow, who removed the Acadians from Nova
Scotia. This was also the home of James Warren, President of the
Provincial Congress.




                                The Town


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

By the State census of 1920 the population of Plymouth was 13,032. The
total valuation in 1920 was $20,854,025, of which $15,573,175 was real
estate, and $5,280,850 personal. The number of polls assessed was 3,523
and the acres of land assessed 50,269. Tax rate, $22.80 on $1,000. The
funded debt January 1, 1920, was $188,533 of which amount $42,933 was
water debt, leaving but $145,600 funded for other purposes. This is
extremely moderate in comparison with the value of the town’s municipal
property and assets, which are net aggregated.

    [Illustration: PLYMOUTH HIGH SCHOOL.]

Few towns are better provided with city conveniences. A system of public
works, introduced in 1855, supplies the inhabitants with pure water from
the great ponds that lie in the woods a few miles south of the town.
Excellent drainage is secured by an extensive system of sewers, the main
outlets discharging in deep water of the harbor 1500 feet from the
shore. The main thoroughfares are lighted by electricity, and both
electricity and gas are in use for illuminants in public buildings,
stores, factories and dwellings. Court Street and Main Street, from the
N. Y., N. H. & H. railroad station to the head of Water Street, comprise
the “Great Whiteway” system of arc lighting from underground wires, with
very satisfactory results. These lights were turned on in the evening of
March 1st, 1916, the occasion having been made an impromptu celebration,
in which several thousands of citizens of Plymouth and neighboring towns
took part. Electric street railways furnish connection with the adjacent
towns, and are a source of much pleasure in summer for trolley trips to
the beaches, hotels, and suburbs.

    [Illustration: PLYMOUTH PUBLIC LIBRARY.]

The town has a public library incorporated in 1880, containing nearly
16,000 volumes and a valuable collection of 4,000 large photographs from
the finest art subjects in European galleries. Its schools rank among
the best in the State, and its high-school building, erected in 1891 at
a cost of forty thousand dollars, and enlarged in 1914 at a cost of more
than thirty thousand dollars, has accommodation for over three hundred
pupils. In its religious denominations holding regular services are
represented the Unitarian, Congregational, Baptist, Universalist,
Methodist, Catholic, Episcopal, Advent, German Lutheran, Christian
Scientist, Spiritualist, Latter Day Saints and Jewish faiths.

Plymouth has good streets, her principal thoroughfares being
macadamized. The sidewalks throughout the centre of the town are
concreted. Her stores are kept abreast of the times, and a weekly
newspaper, the Old Colony Memorial established May, 1822, chronicles the
happenings of local and neighborhood interest.

The town contains five banking institutions,—Old Colony and the Plymouth
National banks; the Plymouth, the Plymouth Five Cents and the Plymouth
Co-operative savings banks, occupying two fine brick buildings on Main
Street. There are six excellent hotels within the town limits, four of
them well known as summer resorts. To the credit of the town be it said,
that its citizens are so law abiding that only a small but very
effective uniformed police force is required, and there is seldom
occasion of arrest for any serious offense.

The fire department has a first-class alarm and motor system, and is run
in regular city style. The town voted in March, 1916, to reorganize the
department under a single Commissioner, and appropriated about $17,000
for new motor apparatus. Of the four “auto” pieces, going into
commission in 1917, two are combined chemical and hose; one a powerful
three stream pump, hose and ladder combination; and one a first-class
ladder truck. This modern outfit, in charge of a chief and permanent
force at the Central station, is so quickly effective as to meet
emergencies; but two steamers, one ladder truck and a hose wagon of the
old department, are kept available in case of need.

    [Illustration: ARMORY.]

The military establishment consists of a fine State armory which cost
$30,000 in which the “Standish Guards,” chartered in 1818, have their
quarters. The “Guards” were one of the best companies in the dandy Fifth
Regiment, and their past history in the Civil and Spanish wars is highly
creditable. They were “Minute Men of 1861,” responding under Capt.
Charles C. Doten on the first call for troops the morning of April 16,
1861, and with their regiment, then the Third Massachusetts, were the
very first of any troops of the war, either National or Volunteer, to go
within the rebel lines as they did when on the gunboat “Pawnee” they ran
the rebel batteries and destroyed the Norfolk navy yard, and rescued the
frigate “Cumberland” on the night of April 20, 1861. In the Spanish war,
commanded by Capt. W. C. Butler, they were in camp in the South, but the
regiment, the Fifth, was not sent to Cuba, while all the while in
instant readiness for active service. Again, June 21, 1916, as company D
of the Fifth, they at once responded to the call for state troops to
defend the Mexican border, and splendidly maintained their patriotic
record, under the command of Capt. Charles H. Robbins,—the Lieut. Col.
of the regiment being their former commander, Capt. W. C. Butler. The
company returned Oct. 21, 1916 and received a hearty welcome from the
townspeople. As part of the National Guard, the company was mustered
into the United States service for the European war, Aug. 8, 1917, under
command of Capt. A. J. Carr, and with 141 men went into camp at
Framingham, Aug. 17, where the 5th and 9th regiments were consolidated
and became the 101st U. S. N. G. Infantry, in the 26th Division,
embarking for service in Europe, Sept. 7, 1917.




                             Its Industries


    [Illustration: Illustrated capital]

The character of Plymouth’s industrial life has entirely changed within
a half century. Within the memory of men now living, the time was when
the town boasted a fleet of seventy-five fishermen, and enjoyed prestige
as a fishing port. In common with other seaport towns of New England,
this industry has departed, but thriving manufactories have risen in its
place and coal barges and steamships are doing business at the port,
superseding the old fishing schooners which once crowded the wharves or
whitened the harbor with their sails.

Plymouth’s manufacturing industries show great diversity of character,
and are exceedingly prosperous. The yearly value of their total product
is not far from fifteen million dollars. The great cordage works at
North Plymouth are the very largest concern of the kind in the world,
employing above 2,000 hands, and have built up a flourishing corporation
hamlet in that quarter of the town. Their manufacturing product is over
$10,000,000 a year, and their big steamships bringing from Yucatan
directly to Plymouth great cargoes of fibre as raw material, give the
port, as one of foreign import, rank in Massachusetts over all other
ports of the state directly next to Boston. There are three large mills
engaged in the production of woolen and worsted cloths, one busy concern
making rugs and mats, while three extensive factories keep many of
Plymouth’s inhabitants employed in the manufacture of tacks, nails, and
rivets. An iron foundry does a large business in stovemaking, and at
Chiltonville there is a big branch plant of the Boston Woven Hose and
Rubber Company, under Plymouth management which supports quite a village
of its own. Besides these are the manufactories of insulated wire for
electrical purposes, zinc and copper, saw gummers and swages, barrels,
boxes, kegs and kits, and numerous smaller enterprises. The Plymouth
Electric Light and Power Company furnishes current to several of these
establishments, besides sending current to Kingston, Duxbury and
Marshfield, Middleboro and Carver for domestic and street lighting. It
also lights Plymouth, having in its circuits of the several towns,
nearly 40 miles of wire. The Cape Cod Canal, on both sides for its
entire length, is illuminated by the P. E. L. Co., through a special
system of heavy aerial conductors comprising a circuit of about 30
miles.

Plymouth’s manufactured products bear an excellent name in the markets
of the world, her cordage and woolen goods being particularly well known
as of the very best character.

In 1912 the town granted to Andrew Kerr a large area of the sand flats
in the harbor for propagation of clams, proving a good enterprise for
the town. The herring fishery, employing many small boats each autumn at
the mouth of the harbor, is also a productive industry of many thousands
of dollars a season.

Of late years many Plymouth residents have engaged in cranberry culture
on an extensive scale, and their ventures have been exceedingly
profitable, amounting to about $400,000 yearly. Together with the
adjoining town of Carver, which is still more extensively engaged in
cranberry raising, the two towns produce more than one-fourth of the
cranberries grown in the entire United States. An industry, which is of
large proportions, is the raising of brook trout and spawn for the
markets.

The recent harbor improvements, and the railroad facilities which will
necessarily be increased in 1920, together with the attention being
centered on Plymouth in its connection with the approaching Tercentenary
Celebration will be likely to attract other manufacturing and business
interests to the town, while its residential advantages are so apparent,
that its eligible locations are now rapidly being appropriated.




                           As a Summer Resort


Viewed simply as the landing-place of the Pilgrims, Plymouth has an
interest which attaches to no other spot in America. The number of
visitors from all parts of the country increases with each year, as
historic sentiment becomes more widespread and facilities for travel are
multiplied. It is estimated that over 125,000 strangers visit the town
in a year. It is not alone on account of its history that Plymouth is
attractive to the visitor. The beauty of its scenery, the unusual
healthfulness of its air, the purity of its water, the variety of its
drives, the number of ponds within its limits, and its unbounded
resources for the sportsman and pleasure-seeker, have been more widely
recognized with each recurring season. It combines the most interesting
features of town and country, and has direct connection with Boston by
the Old Colony Railroad built in 1845, and now leased by the New York,
New Haven and Hartford R. R. Co., also directly with Providence and New
York, by the Fall River Line, and the Plymouth & Middleboro Railroad,
built by the towns in 1892 and sold to the N. Y., N. H. & H. corporation
in 1911. The distance from Boston is thirty-seven miles by rail, with
frequent trains; and during the summer months a daily steamer capable of
carrying 2,000 passengers is on the route between the two places, the
sail being a delightful one.

    [Illustration: CLARK’S ISLAND.]

As a summer resort for health and pleasure, Plymouth has great
attractions. Plymouth and the adjoining towns of Kingston and Duxbury
nearly encircle a harbor of almost unrivalled beauty, a source of
endless pleasure to the summer visitor. There are good sand beaches for
surf and smooth-water sea bathing, bath houses being provided by the
town. In the bay are opportunities for fine sport in the mackerel
season, and a haul of sea-perch, tautog, cod or haddock is always to be
had. Plymouth extends over a territory about eighteen miles long, and
from five to nine miles wide, and beyond the settled parts of the town
is a succession of wooded hills. This large tract is interspersed with
hundreds of large and small ponds (or lakes) stocked with fish,
furnishing limitless fields for the lover of nature or seeker of
pleasure, in walking, riding, fishing, or hunting. Wealthy residents of
other places have fine summer seats at the town overlooking the harbor
and bay.

    [Illustration: ALONG SHORE FROM STEPHENS’ POINT.]




                              The Compact


   Signed in the Cabin of the “Mayflower,” Nov. 11th, Old Style, Nov.
                         21st, New Style, 1620.

“In the name of God, amen, we whose names are underwritten, the loyal
subjects of our dread soveraigne Lord, King James, by the grace of God,
of Great Britain, Franc and Ireland king, defender of the faith, etc.,
having undertaken, for the glorie of God, and advancemente of the
Christian faith, and honor of our king and countrie, a voyage to plant
the first colonie in the Northerne parts of Virginia, doe by these
presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of God, and one of
another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civill body
politick, for our better ordering and preservation and furtherence of
the ends aforesaid; and by virtue hereof to enacte, constitute and frame
such just and equall laws, ordenances, acts, constitutions and offices,
from time to time, as shall be thought most meete and convenient for the
general good of the colonie, unto which we promise all due submission
and obedience. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names
at Cap-Codd the 11 of November, in the year of the raigne of our
soveraigne lord, King James of England, Franc and Ireland, the
eighteenth, and of Scotland the fifty-fourth, ANO DOM 1620.”

   Members of the Mayflower Company

    8  John Carver.
       Katherine Carver, his wife.
       Desire Minter.
       John Howland.
       Roger Wilder.
       William Latham.
       Maid Servant.
       Jasper More.
    6  William Brewster.
       Mary Brewster, his wife.
       Love Brewster.
       Wrestling Brewster.
       Richard More.
       His Brother.
    5  Edward Winslow.
       Elizabeth Winslow, his wife.
       George Soule.
       Elias Story.
       Ellen More.
    2  William Bradford.
       Dorothy Bradford, his wife.
    6  Isaac Allerton.
       Mary Allerton, his wife.
       Bartholomew Allerton.
       Remember Allerton.
       Mary Allerton.
       John Hooke.
    1  Richard Warren.
    4  John Billington.
       Eleanor Billington, his wife.
       John Billington.
       Francis Billington.
    4  Edward Tilley.
       Ann Tilley, his wife.
       Henry Sampson.
       Humility Cooper.
    3  John Tilley.
       His wife.
       Elizabeth Tilley.
    2  Francis Cooke.
       John Cooke.
    2  Thomas Rogers.
       Joseph Rogers.
    3  Thomas Tinker.
       His wife.
       His son.
    2  John Rigdale.
       Alice Rigdale, his wife.
    3  James Chilton.
       His wife.
       Mary Chilton.
    1  Samuel Fuller.
    2  John Crackston.
       John Crackston, Jr.
    2  Miles Standish.
       Rose Standish, his Wife.
    4  Christopher Martin.
       His wife.
       Solomon Power.
       John Langemore.
    5  William Mullins.
       Alice Mullins, his wife.
       Joseph Mullins.
       Robert Carter.
       Priscilla Mullins.
    6  William White.
       Susanna White, his wife.
       Resolved White.
       Peregrine White.
       William Holbeck.
       Edward Thompson.
    8  Stephen Hopkins.
       Elizabeth Hopkins, his wife.
       Giles Hopkins.
       Constance Hopkins.
       Damarius Hopkins.
       Oceanus Hopkins.
       Edward Doty.
       Edward Leister.
    3  Edward Fuller.
       His wife.
       Samuel Fuller.
    3  John Turner
       His son.
       Another son.
    3  Francis Eaton.
       Sarah Eaton, his wife.
       Samuel Eaton.
    1  Moses Fletcher.
    1  Thomas Williams.
    1  Digory Priest.
    1  John Goodman.
    1  Edmund Margeson.
    1  Richard Britteridge.
    1  Richard Clarke.
    1  Richard Gardner.
    1  Gilbert Winslow.
    1  Peter Browne.
    1  John Alden.
    1  Thomas English.
    1  John Allerton.
    1  William Trevore.
    1  —— Ely.
    1  William Butten, who died at
       sea.


A. S. Burbank    _Pilgrim Book and Art Shop_    Plymouth
POST CARDS, PHOTOGRAPHS, SLIDES

  Photographs, 6×8, 35c each, $3.50 dozen.
  Post Cards, 2 for 5c, 30c dozen.
  Lantern Slides, 50c, $6.00 dozen.

  Plymouth Rock.
  The Canopy over the Rock.
  The Canopy and Harbor from Cole’s Hill.
  The Canopy and Cole’s Hill, first burial-place of the Pilgrims.
  Plymouth Harbor as seen from Cole’s Hill.
  Leyden Street, first street in New England.
  Site of the Common House, Leyden Street, first house erected by the
          Pilgrims.
  Leyden Street in 1622, showing first or Common House, Gov. Bradford’s
          House, and the buildings assigned to Brown, Goodman, Brewster,
          Billington, Allerton, Cooke, and Winslow.
  Town Square, showing Church of the First Parish; Town House, formerly
          the Old Colonial Court House, built in 1749; site of Gov.
          Bradford’s House.
  Old Burial Hill, Entrance.
  Site of the Watch Tower, Burial Hill, erected in 1643. View also shows
          the lot of Rev. Adoniram Judson the celebrated missionary to
          Burmah.
  Site of the Old Fort, Burial Hill, built in 1621 as a defense against
          the Indians, and also used as a place of worship.
  The Old Fort and First Meeting-house, 1621.
  Gov. Bradford’s Monument, Burial Hill, showing also the graves of his
          family.
  Grave of Edward Gray, 1681.
  Grave of John Howland, 1672.
  Grave of Thomas Clarke. 1697.
  Cushman Monument.
  Grave of Elder Thomas Cushman.
  Grave of Dr. Francis LeBaron, “The Nameless Nobleman.”
  Pilgrim Hall.
  Interior of Pilgrim Hall, showing Charles Lucy’s famous painting of
          the Departure from Delft Haven, also smaller pictures and
          relics.

    [Illustration: Chair and spinning wheel]

  Gov. Carver’s chair; Ancient Spinning Wheel.
  Interior of Pilgrim Hall, showing Sargent’s painting of the Landing,
          and Weir’s Embarkation, and relics and portraits.
  Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Sargent.
  The Departure from Delft Haven, painting by Charles Lucy.
  Embarkation of the Pilgrims, painting by Weir.
  Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Charles Lucy.
  Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Gisbert.
  Elder Brewster’s Chair; Cradle of Peregrine White, the first Pilgrim
          baby.
  Sword of Myles Standish; Iron Pot and Pewter Platter, brought by
          Standish in the “Mayflower.”
  The “Mayflower” in Plymouth Harbor, from painting by W. F. Hallsall,
          Pilgrim Hall.
  Group of Winslow Relics, Pilgrim Hall.
  Group of White Relics, Pilgrim Hall.
  National Monument to the Forefathers.
  Statue of Freedom, National Monument.
  Statue of Law, National Monument.
  Statue of Education, National Monument.
  Statue of Morality, National Monument.
  Treaty with Massasoit, alto-relief on National Monument.
  Landing of the Pilgrims, alto-relief on National Monument.
  Clark’s Island, where the Pilgrims spent their first Sabbath in
          Plymouth.
  Pulpit Rock, Clark’s Island, from which the first sermon was preached.
  The Gurnet, headland at entrance of harbor.
  Along Shore from Atwood’s Wharf.
  Duxbury Pier Light.
  Gurnet Lights and Keeper’s residence.
  Diagram of streets and Historic Points.
  North Street.
  County Court House and Registry Building.
  New County Prison.
  Town Brook.
  Pilgrim Meersteads along Town Brook.
  A Bit of the Upper Town Brook.
  View along the Wharves from Stephen’s Point.
  Outlet, Billington Sea.
  Pilgrim Wharf and Along Shore.
  Boot Pond.
  Morton Park, Entrance.
  Manomet Bluffs.
  Rocky Shore, Manomet.
  Bathing Beach, Manomet.
  Mayflower Inn.
  Hotel Pilgrim.
  Samoset House.
  Plymouth Rock House.
  Main Street.
  Plymouth Country Club.
  Main Street Bridge over Town Brook.
  Daniel Webster House, Marshfield.
  Plymouth in 1622,—a combination picture, showing Leyden Street, the
          Old Fort, Landing from the Shallop, Plymouth Rock and the ship
          “Mayflower.”
  Gov. Bradford’s House, Plymouth.
  Font in Austerfield Church where Gov. Wm. Bradford was baptized.
  Austerfield Church.
  Birthplace of Gov. William Bradford, Austerfield.
  Page of the Register, Austerfield Church, showing record of the
          baptism of Gov. William Bradford.
  Scrooby Church.
  Interior of Scrooby Church.
  Scrooby Manor House. Elder William Brewster’s Residence.
  Bawtry Church.
  High Street, Bawtry.
  Site of John Robinson’s House at Leyden.
  Church at Leyden where John Robinson was buried.
  Memorial Tablet to John Robinson on Church at Leyden.
  Old Church at Delft Haven, where the Pilgrims held their last service
          before the embarkation.
  The Pilgrim Fathers holding their first meeting for public worship in
          North America.
  “The March of Myles Standish.”

    [Illustration: Cannon barrels]

  Grave of Myles Standish, Duxbury.
  Peregrine White House, Marshfield.
  Old Oaken Bucket House, Scituate.
  Crow House, built by William Crow, 1664.
  Howland House, built by Jacob Mitchell, 1666.
  William Harlow House, built of timber from the Old Burial Hill Fort,
          by William Harlow, 1677.
  Homestead of Gen. John Winslow, 1726.
  The Town House, formerly the Old Colonial Court House, built in 1749.
  The Winslow House, built in 1754, by Edward Winslow. Colonial
          architecture.
  Cole’s Blacksmith Shop, 1684.
  Statue of Myles Standish.
  Myles Standish Monument.
  Standish House, Duxbury, built by son of Myles Standish, 1666.
  Captain’s Hill, Duxbury, the Home of Myles Standish, showing Standish
          House and Monument.
  Winslow House, Marshfield, built about 1700.
  John Alden House, Duxbury, 1653.
  Bradford House, Kingston, 1675.
  John Hancock Sofa, Pilgrim Hall.
  Memorial Tablet, Gov. William Bradford Estate, Kingston.
  Departure from Delft Haven.
  Priscilla and John Alden. From painting by George H. Boughton.
  “Why don’t you Speak for Yourself, John?”
  The Courtship. John Alden and Priscilla. From painting by George H.
          Boughton.
  Departure of the “Mayflower,” from painting by A. W. Bayes.
  Priscilla, from painting by G. H. Boughton.
  Pilgrim Exiles, from painting by Boughton.
  Pilgrims going to Church, from painting by Boughton.
  Two Farewells, from painting by Boughton.
  Return of the “Mayflower,” painting by Boughton.
  Portrait of Edward Winslow, Governor of Plymouth Colony, one of the
          “Mayflower” company. The only authentic portrait of a
          “Mayflower” Pilgrim.


PILGRIM LITERATURE

THE PILGRIM REPUBLIC,

  By John A. Goodwin. This is a new edition of a book first published in
  1888 and long recognized as the standard history of the Pilgrims. By
  mail, $7.65.

THE PILGRIMS AND THEIR HISTORY,

  By Roland G. Usher, Ph. D. The three hundred ten pages of this book
  contain all of the really pertinent information about the Pilgrims and
  their history. Illustrated, by mail, $2.65.

THE PILGRIMS IN THEIR THREE HOMES,

  England, Holland and America, by W. E. Griffis, illustrated. By mail,
  $1.85.

THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

  Containing reprints of Morton’s New England Memorial, Cushman’s
  Discourse, Winslow’s Relation, and other contemporary narrations, 364
  pages, flexible leather, postpaid, $2.60; cloth, $1.10.

IN THE DAYS OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

  By Mary C. Crawford. The Story of the Plymouth Colony—its settlement
  and early days, its events and personalities. By mail, $3.15.

THE WOMEN WHO CAME IN THE MAYFLOWER

  And their comrades who came later in The Ann and The Fortune, by Annie
  Russell Marble. By mail, $1.60.

WHEN MAYFLOWERS BLOSSOM,

  By Albert H. Plumb. A romance of Plymouth’s first years. By mail,
  $2.15.

THE FIRST CHURCH IN PLYMOUTH,

  A brief history from 1606 to 1901, by John Cuckson, Minister. By mail,
  $1.60.

THE ARGONAUTS OF FAITH,

  By Basil Mathews. The Pilgrim Story, told in a dramatic way that holds
  the interest alike for young people and their elders. Illustrated in
  colors. By mail, $1.60.

CAPTAIN MYLES STANDISH,

  By Tudor Jenks. By mail, $1.90.

THE MAYFLOWER PILGRIMS,

  By E. J. Carpenter. By mail, $2.15.

CAPE COD, NEW AND OLD,

  By Agnes Edwards, profusely illustrated by Ruyl. Written with genuine
  appreciation of the charm of “Old Cape Cod.” By mail, $3.15.

THE OLD COAST ROAD

  From Boston to Plymouth. By Agnes Edwards. Illustrated by Ruyl. One of
  the most historic roads in the country, passing many quaint old houses
  and places connected with New England history. By mail, $3.15.

CAPE COD,

  By Henry D. Thoreau. 16 full page illustrations. Traveling on foot
  through the Cape, Thoreau missed nothing that was entertaining or
  characteristic. By mail, $1.85.

CAPE-CODDITIES,

  By Dennis and Marion Chatham. Illustrated. A pleasurable bit of summer
  life on Cape Cod outside the usual routine. By mail, $1.45.

CAPE COD BALLADS,

  By Joseph C. Lincoln. By mail, $2.15.

CAPE COD AND THE OLD COLONY,

  By Albert Perry Brigham with 35 full page illustrations from
  photographs and maps. By mail, $3.65.

OLD PLYMOUTH TRAILS,

  By Winthrop Packard. 24 full page illustrations. Entertainingly
  written by a true lover of nature. By mail, $3.15.

THE OLD COLONY STORIES,

  By Jane G. Austin. New uniform edition in five volumes, $2.00 each.
  The set, boxed, $10.00. Add 10c each for mailing.

  These novels, dealing with the early settlers of Plymouth, have taken
  their place among the American classics, and their combination of
  romantic interest, real literary quality, and historical accuracy has
  won for them wide popularity. The titles alone bring before the mind a
  vision of the most famous colonists: “Betty Alden,” “A Nameless
  Nobleman,” “Standish of Standish,” “Dr. LeBaron and his Daughters,”
  “David Alden’s Daughter and Other Stories.” This attractive new
  edition will open the doors of the Pilgrim homes to many new readers
  and will be welcomed in its uniform dress by old acquaintances.

STANDISH OF STANDISH—Dramatized.

  A dramatized version by Annie Russell Marble of Mrs. Austin’s famous
  portrayal of life in the earliest days of the Plymouth Colony. By
  mail, $1.35.

ON PLYMOUTH ROCK,

  By Samuel Adams Drake. Illustrated, cloth, 173 pages, postpaid, $1.00.

GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH.

  Descriptive of the historic points and localities famous in the story
  of the Pilgrims. Profusely illustrated, 96 pages, postpaid, 25 cents.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE PILGRIMS,

  Compiled from the writings of Governor Bradford and Governor Winslow,
  and largely in their own words. Alphabetical list of passengers on the
  Mayflower with valuable notations in regard to each person. 57 pages,
  paper covers. By mail, 28c.

PILGRIM PLYMOUTH ILLUSTRATED.

  The pictures are full page, with brief descriptive lines, and consists
  of reproductions from paintings of scenes in Pilgrim life, and
  photographs of historic points in old Plymouth. Size of book, 8×10.
  Price, 60 cents postpaid.

HANDBOOK OF HISTORIC DUXBURY,

  By Gershom Bradford. By mail, 90 cents.

VALUABLE OUT OF PRINT BOOKS (A few copies for sale)

  Ancient Landmarks of Plymouth and Genealogical Register, by Wm. T.
  Davis. Postpaid, $8.00.

  History of Plymouth, by Wm. T. Davis. Postpaid, $4.00.

  Epitaphs Old Burial Hill, complete, by Kingman. Postpaid, $3.25.


PILGRIM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS

THE STORY OF THE PILGRIMS, FOR CHILDREN.

  By Roland G. Usher—a dramatic, accurate and patriotic story which
  should leave in the child’s mind correct impressions about the
  fundamental factors in Pilgrim history. Illustrated, by mail, $1.35.

THE PILOT OF THE MAYFLOWER.

  A Tale of the Children of the Pilgrim Republic. By Hezekiah
  Butterworth. Illustrated by H. Winthrop Peirce and others. 12mo,
  cloth. By mail, $2.15.

THE STORY OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

  Retold for Young Folks by H. B. Tunnicliff. Illustrated. By mail,
  $1.35.

YOUNG PEOPLE’S HISTORY OF THE PILGRIMS,

  By William Elliot Griffis. Illustrated. A complete story of the
  Pilgrims in which prominence is given to the things that must have
  keenly interested the Pilgrim boys and girls. By mail, $3.15.

LETTERS FROM COLONIAL CHILDREN,

  By Eva March Tappan. These letters give an idea of life in Plymouth
  and other representative colonies seen through a child’s eyes,
  presenting a vivid and historically accurate picture of the times. By
  mail, $2.65.

PILGRIM STORIES

  For Children, illustrated, postpaid, $1.00.

STORIES OF COLONIAL CHILDREN,

  By Mara L. Pratt. 223 pages, illustrated. Postpaid, $1.00.

    [Illustration: MAJOR JOHN BRADFORD HOUSE

Built by Major John Bradford in 1674. Partially burned in King Phillip’s
War two years later. It was for a quarter of a century the resting place
of the famous Manuscript History of Plymouth Plantation.]


_PILGRIM GIFTS_

   of artistic excellence prized for historic and sentimental value.

STERLING SILVER PILGRIM SPOONS.

  Your selection from seven artistic designs—the ship
  Mayflower—Priscilla—Myles Standish—Pilgrim Monument—Plymouth
  Rock—Landing of the Pilgrims—Standish Monument. Tea size $4.50, coffee
  size $2.25, postpaid, tax included.

PILGRIM CHAIR.

  Hand made models of Gov. Carver’s chair, brought in the Mayflower and
  now in Pilgrim Hall. Height 7 inches. By mail, $2.00 each.

COATS OF ARMS OF MAYFLOWER FAMILIES,

  Bradford, Howland, Standish, Alden, Brewster, Fuller, Winslow, Warren,
  Cooke and White. Hand colored, $1.50 each, plain 25 cents, postpaid.

“PENELOPE WINSLOW” BODKIN.

  A perfect copy, in sterling silver, of the bodkin once owned by
  Penelope Winslow, and now in Pilgrim Hall. Price, by mail, $1.00.

PRISCILLA CAPS,

  In white, pink, blue, lavender and yellow. Very desirable for use at
  fairs, pageants, Thanksgiving or New England dinners. Price, by mail,
  $1.00.

PRISCILLA BROOCH.

  A neat and artistic brooch, carrying a portrait of Priscilla Alden.
  Attractively colored, with the appearance of being hand-painted.
  Price, by mail, 30 cents.

PLYMOUTH ROCK RINGS.

  Sterling silver finger rings—Plymouth Rock 1620 design—by mail,
  $1.35—state size in ordering.

PLYMOUTH PENNANTS

  Suitable for decorating a den or student’s room. In attractive colors.
  Price of various sizes: 25c, 50c, 75c, $1.00.

SOUVENIR WATCH FOBS,

  With leather guards and metal pendants bearing designs in
  relief—“Plymouth Rock”—“Pilgrim Monument.” By mail, 50 cents each.

PILGRIM PENCIL TIPS

  For protecting the pencil point. A pleasing novelty, hand painted, in
  representation of Priscilla and of John Alden. By mail, 70c the pair,
  or 35c single.

MAYFLOWER NAPKINS.

  Paper napkins bearing a design of “The Mayflower” in Plymouth Harbor,
  1620. Dainty for use in giving a Pilgrim lunch or tea. The price, 30c
  for 50 napkins by mail.

PLASTIC CASTS.

  Wall decorations of historic value. In plaster, not colored. Desirable
  for studio or den. Securely packed, by mail—7 inch plaques: Priscilla,
  John Alden, Squanto, 90c each; 4½×8 inch panel, Priscilla and John
  Alden, 90c; 4½×8 inch panel, Landing of The Pilgrims, $2.00.

PILGRIM PLACE CARDS.

  12 Designs in a package—artistic and pleasing—50c the package.

PLYMOUTH ROCK PAPER WEIGHTS,

  Moulded in the shape of Plymouth Rock, with date 1620. A useful
  memento of historic value. Genuine bronze, $2.00. Solid glass 35c—add
  10c each for mailing.

PILGRIM TERCENTENARY MEDAL 1620-1920.

  A beautifully executed souvenir in genuine bronze, 2¾ inches in
  diameter, bearing on one side a model of the ship Mayflower and on the
  reverse a relief of The Landing of the Pilgrims, Dec. 21, 1620. By
  mail, $4.00 each.

THE CAPE COD FIRE LIGHTER.

  Everybody loves a log fire and here is a way to start the blaze
  quickly without the use of kindling. Made of brass $4.50, or with tray
  $5.75. Add 15c for mailing.

PLYMOUTH ROCK BAYBERRY

  A miniature model of Plymouth Rock moulded in genuine bayberry wax
  with the date 1620. A real novelty for milady’s work bag. Each one in
  a box, 30c.

    [Illustration: Model of Plymouth Rock]

BAYBERRY CANDLES,

  Genuine hand dipped, 10c, 15c, 25c, 50c each. On less than six candles
  add 10c for postage.

A PLYMOUTH CLAM.

  A pincushion made from Plymouth clam shells, 25c postpaid.

PRISCILLA DOLLS.

  Dressed in ye costume of 1620—a delightful gift for the little ones.
  Price, $3.75 postpaid.

PILGRIM PAPER DOLLS.

  Packet by mail, 15c.

THE PILGRIM FOLDER.

  20 Pictures in colors, by mail, 12c.

YE OLD FARMERS ALMANAC.

  By mail, 17c.

Ye SWORDE OF MYLES STANDISH,

  “Spake, in the pride of his heart, Myles Standish, the Captain of
              Plymouth,—
  ‘This is the sword of Damascus I fought with in Flanders.’”
                                                            —Longfellow.

    [Illustration: Replica of Sword]

  The famous Damascus blade of the redoubtable Pilgrim Captain is one of
  the most valuable relics to be seen in Pilgrim Hall. It was handed
  down to Myles Standish from the Crusaders, and possessed an
  interesting history even in his day. Our swords are perfectly copied
  from the original, even in the engraving of the curious Arabic
  inscription on the blade. Prices by mail, tax included.

  Paper Cutter, sterling silver,        $3.25

THE MAYFLOWER CANDLESTICK.

  An exact copy of a brass candlestick brought over in the Mayflower by
  William White, father of Peregrine White. The original candlestick is
  now in Pilgrim Hall, price $3.75 each. If by mail add 15 cents
  postage.

THE COMPACT.

  Signed in the cabin of the Mayflower, November 21, 1620, with the
  names of the signers.

  Printed in old style type on a parchment paper made by hand in 1856,
  and mounted on rollers in form of a scroll. Price, securely packed, by
  mail, 40 cents.

STERLING SILVER PINS.

  Correct representation of Plymouth Rock and of the ship Mayflower in
  the shape of stick pins and brooches. Price of any one design,
  postpaid, 80 cents, tax included.

BANJO CLOCKS.

  A miniature reproduction of a Colonial design. The clock is 17 inches
  high, beautifully finished with brass trimmings, and is a good
  timekeeper. Will make a distinctive and useful gift. Priced at $12.25;
  by mail, 35 cents extra. Without brass trimmings and center panel,
  $11.25; by mail, 35 cents extra.

    [Illustration: _Old Blue Pilgrim Plates_
    10 INCH.]

This set of plates, as illustrated, was made to our order in
Staffordshire, England.

The border design and old blue coloring is an exact reproduction of the
old Staffordshire plates made in the eighteenth century.

The central pictures are from objects and paintings of interest in
Pilgrim history. The reverse side bears the title and a quotation
encircled by a wreath of Mayflowers.

The decoration, in a deep old blue, is under the glaze and therefore
indelible.

There are eight subjects: The Mayflower in Plymouth Harbor; The Landing
of the Pilgrims; Priscilla and John Alden; Pilgrim Monument; Myles
Standish House, 1666; John Alden House; Pilgrim Hall; “Why don’t you
speak for yourself, John?”

The price is twelve dollars per dozen, or $1.00 each, packed for
expressing. Price by mail, in a safety mailing box, $1.25 each.

_Old Blue Platter._

  17 inch to match plates, $3.50 each.

  CUPS AND SAUCERS to match, $10.00 per dozen.
  CREAM JUGS, 75c.
  QUART PITCHER, $2.50.


                          _PLYMOUTH ROCK HOUSE
                              Cole’s Hill_

    [Illustration: Plymouth Rock House]

                       DINNER ON ARRIVAL OF BOAT

                   Summer Board at Reasonable Prices

                       HOUSE OPEN THE YEAR ROUND

                     Electric Lights    Steam Heat

                     _CLARK & SAMPSON, Proprietors_

                   Long Distance Telephone Connection


                             SAMOSET HOUSE
                            PLYMOUTH, MASS.

    [Illustration: Samoset House]

First-class in every respect. Large parlors and piazzas, electric light,
steam heat. Open fireplaces and private baths. Convenient to all points
of historical interest. Quiet and comfortable.

    [Illustration: PRINCIPAL STREETS OF PLYMOUTH
    AND LOCALITIES OF INTEREST]

                        A. S. Burbank, Publisher
                       Pilgrim Book and Art Shop
                            Plymouth, Mass.

  1. Pilgrim Monument.
  2. Samoset House.
  3. N. Y., N. H. & H. R. R.
  4. Pilgrim Hall.
  5. Court House.
  6. Cole’s Hill.
  7. Plymouth Rock.
  8. Site of first house.
  9. Burial Hill.
  10. Pilgrim Spring.
  11. Training Green.
  12. Watson’s Hill.
  13. Pilgrim Wharf.
  14. Town Brook.
  15. Site of Gov. Bradford House.
  16. Pilgrim Bookstore.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos; left quotations unchanged.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Guide to Historic Plymouth, by A. S. Burbank

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH ***

***** This file should be named 57135-0.txt or 57135-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/1/3/57135/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

